The Power of SilenceClick here for the new Dialogue on the Way of 
Knowledge



      The Power of Silence

            At various times I've attempted to name my knowledge for your 
      benefit. I've said that the most appropriate name is nagualism, but that 
      that term is too obscure. Calling it simply "knowledge" makes it too 
      vague, and to call it "witchcraft" is debasing. "The mastery of intent " 
      is too abstract, and "the search for total freedom" too long and 
      metaphorical. Finally, because I've been unable to find a more appropriate 
      name, I've called it "sorcery," although I admit it is not really 
accurate.
            I've given you different definitions of sorcery, but I have always 
      maintained that definitions change as knowledge increases. Now you are in 
      a position to appreciate a clearer definition.
            From where the average man stands, sorcery is nonsense or an ominous 
      mystery beyond his reach. And he is right--not because this is an absolute 
      fact, but because the average man lacks the energy to deal with sorcery.
            Human beings are born with a finite amount of energy, an energy that 
      is systematically deployed, beginning at the moment of birth, in order 
      that it may be used most advantageously by the modality of the time.
            The modality of the time is the precise bundle of energy fields 
      being perceived. I believe man's perception has changed through the ages. 
      The actual time decides the mode; the time decides which precise bundle of 
      energy fields, out of an incalculable number, are to be used. And handling 
      the modality of the time--those few, selected energy fields--takes all our 
      available energy, leaving us nothing that would help us use any of the 
      other energy fields.
            The average man, if he uses only the energy he has, can't perceive 
      the worlds sorcerers do. To perceive them, sorcerers need to use a cluster 
      of energy fields not ordinarily used. Naturally, if the average man is to 
      perceive those worlds and understand sorcerers' perception he must use the 
      same cluster they have used. And this is just not possible, because all 
      his energy is already deployed.
            Think of it this way. It isn't that as time goes by you're learning 
      sorcery; rather, what you're learning is to save energy. And this energy 
      will enable you to handle some of the energy fields which are inaccessible 
      to you now. And that is sorcery: the ability to use energy fields that are 
      not employed in perceiving the ordinary world we know. Sorcery is a state 
      of awareness. Sorcery is the ability to perceive something which ordinary 
      perception cannot.
            Everything a teacher puts his apprentice through, each of the things 
      he shows him is only a device to convince him that there's more to us than 
      meets the eye.
            We don't need anyone to teach us sorcery, because there is really 
      nothing to learn. What we need is a teacher to convince us that there is 
      incalculable power at our fingertips. What a strange paradox! Every 
      warrior on the path of knowledge thinks, at one time or another, that he's 
      learning sorcery, but all he's doing is allowing himself to be convinced 
      of the power hidden in his being, and that he can reach it.
            I'm trying to convince you that you can reach that power. I went 
      through the same thing. And I was as hard to convince as you are. Once we 
      have reached it, it will, by itself, make use of energy fields which are 
      available to us but inaccessible. And that, as I have said, is sorcery. We 
      begin then to see --that is, to perceive--something else; not as 
      imagination, but as real and concrete. And then we begin to know without 
      having to use words. And what any of us does with that increased 
      perception, with that silent knowledge, depends on our own temperament.
            Now, I'm going to give you a different and more precise definition 
      of sorcery.
            In the universe there is an unmeasurable, indescribable force which 
      sorcerers call intent. Absolutely everything that exists in the entire 
      cosmos is attached to intent by a connecting link. Sorcerers, warriors, 
      are concerned with discussing, understanding, and employing that 
      connecting link. They are especially concerned with cleaning it of the 
      numbing effects brought about by the ordinary concerns of their everyday 
      lives. Sorcery at this level could be defined as the procedure of cleaning 
      one's connecting link to intent.
            The task of sorcery is to take this seemingly incomprehensible 
      knowledge and make it understandable by the standards of awareness of 
      everyday life.
            The guide in the lives of sorcerers is called "the nagual." The 
      nagual is a man or a woman with extraordinary energy, a teacher who has 
      sobriety, endurance, stability; someone seers see as a luminous sphere 
      having four compartments, as if four luminous balls have been compressed 
      together. Naguals are responsible for supplying what sorcerers call "the 
      minimal chance": the awareness of one's connection with intent .
            Naguals school their apprentices toward three areas of expertise: 
      the mastery of awareness , the art of stalking , and the mastery of intent 
      . These three areas of expertise are the three riddles sorcerers encounter 
      in their search for knowledge.
            The mastery of awareness is the riddle of the mind; the perplexity 
      sorcerers experience when they recognize the astounding mystery and scope 
      of awareness and perception.
            The art of stalking is the riddle of the heart; the puzzlement 
      sorcerers feel upon becoming aware of two things: first that the world 
      appears to us to be unalterably objective and factual, because of 
      peculiarities of our awareness and perception; second, that if different 
      peculiarities of perception come into play, the very things about the 
      world that seem so unalterably objective and factual change.
            The mastery of intent is the riddle of the spirit, or the paradox of 
      the abstract--sorcerers' thoughts and actions projected beyond our human 
      condition.
            The art of stalking and the mastery of intent depend upon 
      instruction on the mastery of awareness, which consists of the following 
      basic premises:
            
        The universe is an infinite agglomeration of energy fields, resembling 
        threads of light.
              
        These energy fields, called the Eagle's, or the Indescribable Force 's 
        emanations, radiate from a source of inconceivable proportions 
        metaphorically called the Eagle--the Indescribable Force .
              
        Human beings are also composed of an incalculable number of the same 
        threadlike energy fields. These Indescribable Force 's emanations form 
        an encased agglomeration that manifests itself as a ball of light the 
        size of the person's body with the arms extended laterally, like a giant 
        luminous egg.
              
        Only a very small group of the energy fields inside this luminous ball 
        are lit up by a point of intense brilliance located on the ball's 
        surface.
              
        Perception occurs when the energy fields in that small group immediately 
        surrounding the point of brilliance extent their light to illuminate 
        identical energy fields outside the ball. Since the only energy fields 
        perceivable are those lit by the point of brilliance, that point is 
        named "the point where perception is assembled" or simply "the 
        assemblage point."
              
        The assemblage point can be moved from its usual position on the surface 
        of the luminous ball to another position on the surface, or into the 
        interior. Since the brilliance of the assemblage point can light up 
        whatever energy field it comes in contact with, when it moves to a new 
        position it immediately brightens up new energy fields, making them 
        perceivable. This perception is known as seeing .
              
        When the assemblage point shifts, it makes possible the perception of an 
        entirely different world--as objective and factual as the one we 
        normally perceive. Sorcerers go into that other world to get energy, 
        power, solutions to general and particular problems, or to face the 
        unimaginable.
              
        Intent is the pervasive force that causes us to perceive. We do not 
        become aware because we perceive; rather, we perceive as a result of the 
        pressure and intrusion of intent .
              
        The aim of sorcerers is to reach a state of total awareness in order to 
        experience all the possibilities of perception available to man. This 
        state of awareness even implies an alternative way of dying.
              * * *
              A level of practical knowledge is included as part of teaching the 
        mastery of awareness. On this practical level are taught the procedures 
        necessary to move the assemblage point. The two great systems devised by 
        the sorcerer seers of ancient times to accomplish this are dreaming , 
        the control and utilization of dreams; and stalking , the control of 
        behavior.
              Moving one's assemblage point is an essential maneuver that every 
        sorcerer has to learn.
              
              
      Sorcerers consult their past in order to obtain a point of reference. 
      Establishing a point of reference means getting a chance to examine intent 
      and nothing can give sorcerers a better view of intent than examining 
      stories of other sorcerers battling to understand the same force.
            In sorcery there are abstract cores, and then, based on those 
      abstract cores, there are scores of sorcery stories about the naguals of 
      our lineage battling to understand the spirit.
            * * *
            The only way to know intent is to know it directly through a living 
      connection that exists between intent and all sentient beings. Sorcerers 
      call intent the indescribable, the spirit, the abstract.
            * *
            Every act performed by sorcerers, especially by the naguals, is 
      either performed as a way to strengthen their link with intent or as a 
      response triggered by the link itself. Sorcerers, and specifically the 
      naguals, therefore have to be actively and permanently on the lookout for 
      manifestations of the spirit. Such manifestations are called gestures of 
      the spirit or, more simply, indications or omens.
            When a sorcerer interprets an omen he knows its exact meaning 
      without having any notion of how he knows it. This is one of the 
      bewildering effects of the connecting link with intent . Sorcerers have a 
      sense of knowing things directly. How sure they are depends on the 
      strength and clarity of their connecting link.
            The feeling everyone knows as "intuition" is the activation of our 
      link with intent . And since sorcerers deliberately pursue the 
      understanding and strengthening of that link, it could be said the they 
      intuit everything unerringly and accurately. Reading omens is commonplace 
      for sorcerers--mistakes happen only when personal feelings intervene and 
      cloud the sorcerers' connecting link with intent . Otherwise their direct 
      knowledge is totally accurate and functional.
            The spirit manifests itself to a sorcery, especially to a nagual, at 
      every turn. However, this is not the entire truth. The entire truth is 
      that the spirit reveals itself to everyone with the same intensity and 
      consistency, but only sorcerers, and naguals in particular, are attuned to 
      such revelations.
            Naguals make decisions. With no regard for the consequences they 
      take action or choose not to. Imposters ponder and become paralyzed.
            * * *
            Sorcerers speak of sorcery as a magical, mysterious bird which has 
      paused in its flight for a moment in order to give man hope and purpose. 
      Sorcerers live under the wing of that bird, which they call the bird of 
      wisdom, the bird of freedom. They nourish it with their dedication and 
      impeccability.
            The bird of freedom can do only two things, take sorcerers along, or 
      leave them behind. Don't forget, even for an instant, that the bird of 
      freedom has very little patience with indecision, and when it flies away, 
      it never returns.
            
            When you have been afraid or upset, don't lie down to sleep, sleep 
      sitting up on a soft chair. To give your body healing rest take long naps, 
      lying on your stomach with your face turned to the left and your feet over 
      the foot of the bed. In order to avoid being cold, put a soft pillow over 
      your shoulders, away from your neck, and wear heavy socks, or just leave 
      your shoes on. Follow my suggestions to the letter without bothering to 
      believe or disbelieve me.
            * * *
            Intent creates edifices before us and invites us to enter them. This 
      is the way sorcerers understand what is happening around them.
            I want you to understand the underlying order of what I teach you. 
      It means two things: both the edifice that intent manufactures in the 
      blink of an eye and places in front of us to enter, and the signs it gives 
      us so we won't get lost once we are inside.
            * * *
            At a certain stage, an apprentice enters into heightened awareness 
      all by himself. Heightened awareness is a mystery only for our reason. In 
      practice, it's very simple. As with everything else, we complicate matters 
      by trying to make the immensity that surrounds us reasonable.
            * * *
            The Manifestations of the Spirit is the name for the first abstract 
      core in the sorcery stories. Sorcerers know this as the edifice of intent 
      , or the silent voice of the spirit, or the ulterior arrangement of the 
      abstract.
            Ulterior means knowledge without words, outside our immediate 
      comprehension, not beyond our ultimate possibilities for understanding. 
      The ulterior arrangement of the abstract is knowledge without words or the 
      edifice of intent . The ulterior arrangement of the abstract is to know 
      the abstract directly, without the intervention of language. The abstract 
      is the element without which there could be no warrior's path, nor any 
      warriors in search of knowledge.
            * * *
            Warriors are incapable of feeling compassion because they no longer 
      feel sorry for themselves. Without the driving force of self-pity, 
      compassion is meaningless.
            For a warrior everything begins and ends with himself. However, his 
      contact with the abstract causes him to overcome his feeling of 
      self-importance. Then the self becomes abstract and impersonal.
            * * *
            Dreaming is a sorcerer's jet plane. They can create and project what 
      sorcerers know as the dreaming body , or the Other, and be in two distant 
      places at the same time.
            The spirit makes adjustments in our capacity for awareness. That's a 
      statement of fact. You can say that it's an incomprehensible fact for the 
      moment, but the moment will change.
            While we dream the assemblage point moves very gently and naturally. 
      Mental balance is nothing but the fixing of the assemblage point on one 
      spot we're accustomed to. Dreams make that point move, and dreaming is 
      used to control that natural movement.
            There are two different issues. One, the need to understand 
      indirectly what the spirit is, and the other, to understand the spirit 
      directly.
            Once you understand what the spirit is, the second issue will be 
      resolved automatically, and vice versa. If the spirit speaks to you, using 
      its silent words, you will certainly know immediately what the spirit is.
            The difficulty is our reluctance to accept the idea that knowledge 
      can exist without words to explain it. Accepting this proposition is not 
      as easy as saying you accept it. The whole of humanity has moved away from 
      the abstract. It takes years for an apprentice to be able to go back to 
      the abstract, that is, to know that knowledge and language can exist 
      independent of each other.
            The crux of our difficulty in going back to the abstract is our 
      refusal to accept that we can know without words or even without thoughts. 
      Knowledge and language are separate.
            I told you there is no way to talk about the spirit because the 
      spirit can only be experienced. Sorcerers try to explain this condition 
      when they say that the spirit is nothing you can see or feel. But it's 
      there looming over us always. Sometimes it comes to some of us. Most of 
      the time it seems indifferent.
            The spirit in many ways is a sort of wild animal. It keeps its 
      distance from us until a moment when something entices it forward. It is 
      then that the spirit manifests itself.
            For a sorcerer an abstract is something with no parallel in the 
      human condition. For a sorcerer, the spirit is an abstract simply because 
      he knows it without words or even thoughts. It's an abstract because he 
      can't conceive what the spirit is. Yet without the slightest chance or 
      desire to understand it, a sorcerer handles the spirit. He recognizes it, 
      beckons it, entices it, becomes familiar with it, and expresses it with 
      his acts.
            Think about the proposition that knowledge might be independent of 
      language, without bothering to understand it.
            Consider this. It was not the act of meeting me that mattered to 
      you. The day I met you, you met the abstract. But since you couldn't talk 
      about it, you didn't notice it. Sorcerers meet the abstract without 
      thinking about it or seeing it or touching it or feeling its presence.
            
            The second abstract core of the sorcery stories is called the Knock 
      of the Spirit. The first core, the Manifestations of the Spirit, is the 
      edifice that intent builds and places before a sorcerer, then invites him 
      to enter. It is the edifice of intent seen by a sorcerer. The Knock of the 
      Spirit is the same edifice seen by the beginner who is invited--or rather 
      forced--to enter.
            A nagual can be a conduit for the spirit only after the spirit has 
      manifested its willingness to be used--either almost imperceptibly or with 
      outright commands.
            After a lifetime of practice, sorcerers, naguals in particular, know 
      if the spirit is inviting them to enter the edifice being flaunted before 
      them. They have learned to discipline their connecting links to intent . 
      So they are always forewarned, always know what the spirit has in store 
      for them.
            Progress along the sorcerers' path is, in general, a drastic process 
      the purpose of which is to bring one's connecting link to order. In order 
      to revive that link sorcerers need a rigorous, fierce purpose--a special 
      state of mind called unbending intent .
            An apprentice is someone who is striving to clear and revive his 
      connecting link with the spirit. Once the link is revived, he is no longer 
      an apprentice, but until that time, in order to keep going he needs a 
      fierce purpose which, of course, he doesn't have. So he allows the nagual 
      to provide the purpose and to do that he has to relinquish his 
      individuality. That's the difficult part.
            Volunteers are not welcome in the sorcerers' world, because they 
      already have a purpose of their own, which makes it particularly hard for 
      them to relinquish their individuality. If the sorcerers' world demands 
      ideas and actions contrary to the volunteers' purpose, volunteers simply 
      refuse to change.
            Reviving an apprentice's link is a nagual's most challenging and 
      intriguing work. And one of his biggest headaches too. Depending, of 
      course, on the apprentice's personality, the designs of the spirit are 
      either sublimely simple or the most complex labyrinths.
            * * *
            The power of man is incalculable. Death exists only because we have 
      intended it since the moment of our birth. The intent of death can be 
      suspended by making the assemblage point change positions.
            * * *
            I have given you different versions of what the sorcery task 
      consists. It would not be presumptuous of me to disclose that, from the 
      spirit's point of view, the task consists of clearing our connecting link 
      with it. The edifice that intent flaunts before us is, then, a 
      clearinghouse, within which we find not so much the procedures to clear 
      our connecting link as the silent knowledge that allows the clearing 
      process to take place. Without that silent knowledge no process could 
      work, and all we would have would be an indefinite sense of needing 
      something.
            The events unleashed by sorcerers as a result of silent knowledge 
      are so simple and yet so abstract that sorcerers decided long ago to speak 
      of those events only in symbolic terms. The manifestations and the knock 
      of the spirit are examples.
            For instance, a description of what takes place during the initial 
      meeting between a nagual and a prospective apprentice from the sorcerers' 
      point of view, would be absolutely incomprehensible. It would be nonsense 
      to explain that the nagual, by virtue of his lifelong experience, is 
      focusing something we couldn't imagine, his second attention--the 
      increased awareness gained through sorcery training--on his invisible 
      connection with some indefinable abstract. He is doing this to emphasize 
      and clarify someone else's invisible connection with that indefinable 
      abstract.
            Each of us is barred from silent knowledge by natural barriers, 
      specific to each individual. The most impregnable of my barriers was the 
      drive to disguise my complacency as independence.
            We as average men do not know, nor will we ever know, that it is 
      something utterly real and functional--our connecting link with intent 
      --which gives us our hereditary preoccupation with fate. During our active 
      lives we never have the chance to go beyond the level of mere 
      preoccupation, because since time immemorial the lull of daily affairs has 
      made us drowsy. It is only when our lives are nearly over that our 
      hereditary preoccupation with fate begins to take on a different 
      character. It begins to make us see through the fog of daily affairs. 
      Unfortunately, this awakening always comes hand in hand with loss of 
      energy caused by aging, when we have no more strength left to turn our 
      preoccupation into a pragmatic and positive discovery. At this point, all 
      there is left is an amorphous, piercing anguish, a longing for something 
      indescribable, and simple anger at having missed out.
            
            The third abstract core is called the trickery of the spirit, or the 
      trickery of the abstract, or stalking oneself, or dusting the link.
            * * *
            Perception is the hinge for everything man is or does, and 
      perception is ruled by the location of the assemblage point. Therefore, if 
      that point changes positions, man's perception of the world changes 
      accordingly. The sorcerer who knows exactly where to place his assemblage 
      point can become anything he wants.
            * * *
            The art of stalking is learning all the quirks of your disguise. To 
      learn them so well no one will know you are disguised. For that you need 
      to be ruthless, cunning, patient, and sweet.
            Stalking is an art applicable to everything. There are four steps to 
      learning it: ruthlessness, cunning, patience, and sweetness. Ruthlessness 
      should not be harshness, cunning should not be cruelty, patience should 
      not be negligence, and sweetness should not be foolishness. These four 
      steps have to be practiced and perfected until they are so smooth they are 
      unnoticeable.
            
            Knowing what intent is means that one can, at any time, explain that 
      knowledge or use it. A nagual by the force of his position is obliged to 
      command his knowledge in this manner.
            * * *
            A warrior needs focus. Heightened awareness is like a springboard. 
      From it one can jump into infinity. When the assemblage point is 
      dislodged, it either becomes lodged again at a position very near its 
      customary one or continues moving on into infinity.
            People have no idea of the strange power we carry within ourselves. 
      At this moment, for instance, you have the means to reach infinity.
            * * *
            Egomania is a real tyrant. We must work ceaselessly to dethrone it. 
      You can learn to be ruthless, cunning, patient, and sweet. Ruthlessness, 
      cunning, patience, and sweetness are the essence of stalking . They are 
      the basics that with all their ramifications have to be taught in careful, 
      meticulous steps.
            * * *
            Sorcerers' behavior is always impeccable. Sorcerers, though, have an 
      ulterior purpose for their acts, which has nothing to do with personal 
      gain. The fact that they enjoy their acts does not count as gain. Rather, 
      it is a condition of their character. The average man acts only if there 
      is the chance for profit. Warriors say they act not for profit but for the 
      spirit. We have no thought of personal gain. Our acts are dictated by 
      impeccability--we can't be angry or disillusioned.
            The two masteries: stalking and intent , are the crowning glory of 
      sorcerers old and new. Stalking is the beginning. Before anything can be 
      attempted on the warrior's path, warriors must learn to stalk ; next they 
      must learn to intend , and only then can they move their assemblage point 
      at will.
            * * *
            Words are tremendously powerful and important and are the magical 
      property of whoever has them. Sorcerers have a rule of thumb: they say 
      that the deeper the assemblage point moves, the greater the feeling that 
      one has knowledge and no words to explain it. Sometimes the assemblage 
      point of average persons can move without a known cause and without their 
      being aware of it, except that they become tongue-tied, confused, and 
      evasive.
            * * *
            The very first principle of stalking is that a warrior stalks 
      himself. He stalks himself ruthlessly, cunningly, patiently, and sweetly.
            Stalking is the art of using behavior in novel ways for specific 
      purposes. Normal human behavior in the world of everyday life is routine. 
      Any behavior that brakes from routine causes an unusual effect on our 
      total being. That unusual effect is what sorcerers seek, because it is 
      cumulative.
            The sorcerer seers of ancient times, through their seeing , first 
      noticed that unusual behavior produced a tremor in the assemblage point. 
      They soon discovered that if unusual behavior was practiced systematically 
      and directed wisely, it eventually forced the assemblage point to move.
            The real challenge for those sorcerer seers, was finding a system of 
      behavior that was neither petty nor capricious, but that combined the 
      morality and the sense of beauty which differentiates sorcerer seers from 
      plain witches.
            Anyone who succeeds in moving his assemblage point to a new position 
      is a sorcerer. And from that new position, he can do all kinds of good and 
      bad things to his fellow men. Being a sorcerer, therefore, can be like 
      being a cobbler or a baker. The quest of sorcerer seers is to go beyond 
      that stand. And to do that, they need morality and beauty.
            For sorcerers, stalking is the foundation on which everything else 
      they do is built. It is the art of controlled folly.
            * * *
            Sorcerers say that heightened awareness is the portal of intent . 
      And they use it as such. Think about it.
            You must reach the point where you understand what intent is. And, 
      above all, you must understand that that knowledge cannot be turned into 
      words. That knowledge is there for everyone. It is there to be felt, to be 
      used, but not to be explained. One can come into it by changing levels of 
      awareness, therefore, heightened awareness is an entrance. But even the 
      entrance cannot be explained. One can only make use of it.
            The natural knowledge of intent is available to anyone, but the 
      command of it belongs to those who probe it.
            
            Sorcerers believe that until the very moment of the spirit's 
      descent, any of us could walk away from the spirit; but not afterwards.
            The fourth abstract core is called the descent of the spirit or 
      being moved by intent . It is the full brunt of the spirit's descent. The 
      fourth abstract core is an act of revelation. The spirit reveals itself to 
      us. Sorcerers describe it as the spirit lying in ambush and then 
      descending on us, its prey. Sorcerers say that the spirit's descent is 
      always shrouded. It happens and yet it seems not to have happened at all.
            There is a threshold that once crossed permits no retreat. Every 
      sorcerer should have a clear memory of crossing that threshold so he can 
      remind himself of the new state of his perceptual potential. One does not 
      have to be an apprentice of sorcery to reach this threshold, and the only 
      difference between an average man and a sorcerer, in such cases, is what 
      each emphasizes. A sorcerer emphasizes crossing this threshold and uses 
      the memory of it as a point of reference. An average man does not cross 
      the threshold and does his best to forget all about it.
            Sorcerers say that the fourth abstract core happens when the spirit 
      cuts our chains of self-reflection. Cutting our chains is marvelous, but 
      also very undesirable, for nobody wants to be free.
            What a strange feeling: to realize that everything we think, 
      everything we say depends on the position of the assemblage point.
            The secret of our chains is that they imprison us, but by keeping us 
      pinned down on our comfortable spot of self-reflection, they defend us 
      from the onslaughts of the unknown.
            Once our chains are cut, we are no longer bound by the concerns of 
      the daily world. We are still in the daily world, but we don't belong 
      there anymore. In order to belong we must share the concerns of people. 
      And without chains we can't.
            What distinguishes normal people is that we share a metaphorical 
      dagger: the concerns of our self-reflection. With this dagger, we cut 
      ourselves and bleed; and the job of our chains of self-reflection is to 
      give us the feeling that we are bleeding together, that we are sharing 
      something wonderful: our humanity. But if we were to examine it, we would 
      discover that we are bleeding alone; that we are not sharing anything; 
      that all we are doing is toying with our manageable, unreal, man-made 
      reflection.
            Sorcerers are no longer in the world of daily affairs because they 
      are no longer prey to their self-reflection.
            * * *
            The universe is made up of energy fields which defy description or 
      scrutiny. They resemble filaments of ordinary light, except that light is 
      lifeless compared to the Indescribable Force 's emanations, which exude 
      awareness.
            Normal perception occurs when intent , which is pure energy, lights 
      up a portion of the luminous filaments inside our cocoon, and at the same 
      time brightens a long extension of the same luminous filaments extending 
      into infinity outside our cocoon. Extraordinary perception, seeing , 
      occurs when by the force of intent , a different cluster of energy fields 
      energizes and lights up. When a crucial number of energy fields are lit up 
      inside the luminous cocoon, a sorcerer is able to see the energy fields 
      themselves.
            Awareness takes place when the energy fields inside our luminous 
      cocoon are aligned with the same energy fields outside.
            Only a very small portion of the total number of luminous filaments 
      inside the cocoon are energized while the rest remain unaltered. The 
      filaments do not need to be aligned to be lit up, because the ones inside 
      our cocoon are the same as those outside. Whatever energizes them is 
      definitely an independent force. We can't call it awareness because 
      awareness is the glow of the energy fields being lit up. The force that 
      lites up the fields is named will .
            Will is the force that keeps the Indescribable Force 's emanations 
      separated and is not only responsible for our awareness, but also for 
      everything in the universe. This force has total consciousness and it 
      springs from the very fields of energy that make the universe. Intent is a 
      more appropriate name for it than will . In the long run, however, the 
      name proves disadvantageous, because it does not describe its overwhelming 
      importance nor the living connection it has with everything in the 
      universe.
            Our great collective flaw is that we live our lives completely 
      disregarding that connection. The busyness of our lives, our relentless 
      interests, concerns, hopes, frustrations, and fears take precedence, and 
      on a day-to-day basis we are unaware of being linked to everything else.
            Being cast out from the Garden of Eden sounds like an allegory for 
      losing our silent knowledge, our knowledge of intent . Sorcery, then, is a 
      going back to the beginning, a return to paradise.
            The spirit is the force that sustains the universe. Intent is not 
      something one might use or command or move in any way--nevertheless, one 
      could use it, command it, or move it as one desires. This contradiction is 
      the essence of sorcery. To fail to understand it has brought generations 
      of sorcerers unimaginable pain and sorrow. Modern-day naguals, in an 
      effort to avoid paying this exorbitant price in pain, have developed a 
      code of behavior called the warrior's way, or the impeccable action, which 
      prepares sorcerers by enhancing their sobriety and thoughtfulness.
            Sorcerers concern themselves exclusively with the capacity that 
      their individual connecting link with intent has to set them free to light 
      the fire from within.
            All modern-day sorcerers have to struggle fiercely to gain soundness 
      of mind. Sorcery is an attempt to reestablish our knowledge of intent and 
      regain use of it without succumbing to it. The abstract cores of the 
      sorcerer stories are shades of realization, degrees of our being aware of 
      intent .
            * * *
            It does not matter what our specific fate is as long as we face it 
      with ultimate abandon.
            
            A warrior is on permanent guard against the roughness of human 
      behavior. A warrior is magical and ruthless, a maverick with the most 
      refined taste and manners, whose worldly task is to sharpen, yet disguise, 
      his cutting edges so that no one would be able to suspect his 
ruthlessness.
            Sorcerers constantly stalk themselves. The sensation of being 
      bottled up is experienced by every human being. It is a reminder of our 
      existing connection with intent . For sorcerers this sensation is even 
      more acute, precisely because their goal is to sensitize their connecting 
      link until they can make it function at will.
            When the pressure of their connecting link is too great, sorcerers 
      relieve it by stalking themselves. Stalking is a procedure, a very simple 
      one. Stalking is special behavior that follows certain principles. It is 
      secretive, furtive, deceptive behavior designed to deliver a jolt. And, 
      when you stalk yourself you jolt yourself, using your own behavior in a 
      ruthless, cunning way.
            When a sorcerer's awareness becomes bogged down with the weight of 
      his perceptual input, the best, or even perhaps the only, remedy is to use 
      the idea of death to deliver that stalking jolt.
            The idea of death therefore is of monumental importance in the life 
      of a sorcerer. I have shown you innumerable things about death to convince 
      you that the knowledge of our impending and unavoidable end is what gives 
      us sobriety. Our most costly mistake as average men is indulging in a 
      sense of immortality. It is as though we believe that if we don't think 
      about death we can protect ourselves from it.
            Not thinking about death protects us from worrying about it. But 
      that purpose is an unworthy one for average men and a travesty for 
      sorcerers. Without a clear view of death, there is no order, no sobriety, 
      no beauty. Sorcerers struggle to gain this crucial insight in order to 
      help them realize at the deepest possible level that they have no 
      assurance whatsoever their lives will continue beyond the moment. That 
      realization gives sorcerers the courage to be patient and yet take action, 
      courage to be acquiescent without being stupid.
            The idea of death is the only thing that can give sorcerers courage. 
      Strange, isn't it? It gives sorcerers the courage to be cunning without 
      being conceited, and above all it gives them courage to be ruthless 
      without being self-important.
            Sorcerers stalk themselves in order to break the power of their 
      obsessions. There are many ways of stalking oneself. If you don't want to 
      use the idea of your death, you can use poems to stalk yourself.
            I stalk myself with them. I deliver a jolt to myself with them. I 
      listen, and shut off my internal dialogue and let my inner silence gain 
      momentum. Then the combination of the poem and the silence delivers the 
      jolt.
            See if you can feel what I'm talking about with this poem by José 
      Gorostiza.
            ...this incessant stubborn dying,
            this living death,
            that slays you, oh God,
            in your rigorous handiwork,
            in the roses, in the stones,
            in the indomitable stars
            and in the flesh that burns out,
            like a bonfire lit by a song,
            a dream,
            a hue that hits the eye.
            
            ...and you, yourself,
            perhaps have died eternities of ages out there,
            without us knowing about it,
            we dregs, crumbs, ashes of you;
            you that still are present,
            like a star faked by its very light,
            an empty light without star
            that reaches us,
            hiding
            its infinite catastrophe.
            
            As I hear the words, I feel that that man is seeing the essence of 
      things and I can see with him. I care only about the feeling the poets 
      longing brings me. I borrow his longing, and with it I borrow the beauty. 
      And marvel at the fact that he, like a true warrior, lavishes it on the 
      recipients, the beholders, retaining for himself only his longing. This 
      jolt, this shock of beauty, is stalking .
            Death is not an enemy, although it appears to be. Death is not our 
      destroyer, although we think it is.
            Sorcerers say death is the only worthy opponent we have. Death is 
      our challenger. We are born to take that challenge, average men or 
      sorcerers. Sorcerers know about it; average men do not.
            Life is the process by means of which death challenges us. Death is 
      the active force. Life is the arena. And in that arena there are only two 
      contenders at any time: oneself and death.
            We are passive. Think about it. If we move, it's only when we feel 
      the pressure of death. Death sets the pace for our actions and feelings 
      and pushes us relentlessly until it breaks us and wins the bout, or else 
      we rise about all possibilities and defeat death.
            Sorcerers defeat death and death acknowledges the defeat by letting 
      the sorcerers go free, never to be challenged again. Death stops 
      challenging them. It means thought has taken a somersault into the 
      inconceivable.
            A somersault of thought into the inconceivable is the descent of the 
      spirit; the act of breaking our perceptual barriers. It is the moment in 
      which man's perception reaches its limits.
            Sorcerers practice the art of sending scouts, advance runners, to 
      probe our perceptual limits. This is another reason I like poems. I take 
      them as advance runners. But poets don't know as exactly as sorcerers what 
      those advance runners can accomplish.
            * * *
            As the energy that is ordinarily used to maintain the fixed position 
      of the assemblage point becomes liberated, it focuses automatically on 
      that connecting link. There are no techniques or maneuvers for a sorcerer 
      to learn beforehand to move energy from one place to the other. Rather it 
      is a matter of an instantaneous shift taking place once a certain level of 
      proficiency has been attained.
            The level of proficiency is pure understanding. In order to attain 
      that instantaneous shift of energy, one needs a clear connection with 
      intent , and to get a clear connection one needs only to intend it through 
      pure understanding.
            Pure understanding is a sorcerer's advance runner probing that 
      immensity out there.
            
            The nature of ruthlessness is that it is the opposite of self-pity. 
      All sorcerers are ruthless.
            * * *
            As I have said, the fourth abstract core of the sorcery stories is 
      called the descent of the spirit, or being moved by intent . In order to 
      let the mysteries of sorcery reveal themselves it is necessary for the 
      spirit to descend. The spirit chooses a moment when a man is distracted, 
      unguarded, and, showing no pity, the spirit lets its presence by itself 
      move the man's assemblage point to a specific position. This spot is known 
      to sorcerers as the place of no pity. Ruthlessness becomes, in this way, 
      the first principle of sorcery.
            The first principle should not be confused with the first effect of 
      sorcery apprenticeship, which is the shift between normal and heightened 
      awareness.
            To all appearances, having the assemblage point shift is the first 
      thing that actually happens to a sorcery apprentice. So, it is only 
      natural for an apprentice to assume that this is the first principle of 
      sorcery. But it is not. Ruthlessness is the first principle of sorcery.
            What we need to do to allow magic to get hold of us is to banish 
      doubt from our minds. Once doubts are banished, anything is possible.
            * * *
            Stop thinking by intending the movement of your assemblage point. 
      Intent is beckoned with the eyes.
            * * *
            The place of no pity is the site of ruthlessness. Let's say that 
      ruthlessness, being a specific position of the assemblage point, is shown 
      in the eyes of sorcerers. It's like a shimmering film over the eyes. The 
      eyes of sorcerers are brilliant. The greater the shine, the more ruthless 
      the sorcerer is.
            When the assemblage point moves to the place of no pity, the eyes 
      begin to shine. The firmer the grip of the assemblage point on its new 
      position, the more the eyes shine.
            A recapitulation of their lives, which sorcerers do, is the key to 
      moving their assemblage points. Sorcerers start their recapitulation by 
      thinking, by remembering the most important acts of their lives. From 
      merely thinking about them they then move on to actually being at the site 
      of the event. When they can do that--be at the site of the event--they 
      have successfully shifted their assemblage point to the precise spot it 
      was when the event took place. Bringing back the total event by means of 
      shifting the assemblage point is known as sorcerers' recollection.
            Recollecting is not the same as remembering. Remembering is dictated 
      by the day-to-day type of thinking, while recollecting is dictated by the 
      movement of the assemblage point.
            Our assemblage points are constantly shifting; imperceptible shifts. 
      In order to make our assemblage points shift to precise spots we must 
      engage intent . Since there is no way of knowing what intent is, sorcerers 
      let their eyes beckon it.
            * * *
            What you feel and interpret as longing is in fact the sudden 
      movement of your assemblage point.
            Ruthlessness makes sorcerers' eyes shine, and that shine beckons 
      intent . Each spot to which their assemblage points move is indicated by a 
      specific shine of their eyes. Since their eyes have their own memory, they 
      can call up the recollection of any spot by calling up the specific shine 
      associated with that spot.
            The reason sorcerers put so much emphasis on the shine of their eyes 
      and on their gaze is because the eyes are directly connected to intent . 
      Contradictory as it might sound, the truth is that the eyes are only 
      superficially connected to the world of everyday life. Their deeper 
      connection is to the abstract.
            Man's possibilities are so vast and mysterious that sorcerers, 
      rather than thinking about them, have chosen to explore them, with no hope 
      of ever understanding them.
            The only advantages sorcerers may have over average men is that they 
      have stored their energy, which means a more precise, clearer connecting 
      link with intent . Naturally, it also means they can recollect at will, 
      using the shine of their eyes to move their assemblage points.
            * * *
            Be a paragon of patience and consistency by fighting for 
      impeccability. Transform yourself daily, restraining yourself with the 
      most excruciating effort.
            It is a rare opportunity for a warrior to be given a genuine chance 
      to be impeccable in spite of his basic feelings. The act of giving freely 
      and impeccably rejuvenates you and renews your wonder.
            * * *
            The eyes of all living beings can move someone else's assemblage 
      point, especially if their eyes are focused on intent . Under normal 
      conditions, however, peoples eyes are focused on the world, looking for 
      food... looking for shelter...
            For sorcerers to use the shine of their eyes to move their own or 
      anyone else's assemblage point they have to be ruthless. That is, they 
      have to be familiar with that specific position of the assemblage point 
      called the place of no pity. This is especially true for the naguals.
            Each nagual develops a brand of ruthlessness specific to him alone. 
      Naguals mask their ruthlessness automatically, even against their will. 
      I'm not a rational man, I only appear to be because my mask is so 
      effective. What you perceive as reasonableness is my lack of pity, because 
      that's what ruthlessness is: a total lack of pity.
            Move your assemblage point to the precise spot where pity 
      disappears. That spot is known as the place of no pity. The problem that 
      sorcerers have to solve is that the place of no pity has to be reached 
      with only minimal help.
            Everything sorcerers do is done as a consequence of a movement of 
      their assemblage points, and such movements are ruled by the amount of 
      energy sorcerers have at their command.
            Inside every human being is a gigantic, dark lake of silent 
      knowledge which each of us could intuit. Sorcerers are the only beings on 
      earth who deliberately go beyond the intuitive level by training 
      themselves to do two transcendental things: first, to conceive the 
      existence of the assemblage point, and second, to make that assemblage 
      point move.
            The most sophisticated knowledge sorcerers possess is of our 
      potential as perceiving beings, and the knowledge that the content of 
      perception depends on the position of the assemblage point.
            * * *
            Enjoy things with no expectation.
            * * *
            When the assemblage point moves and reaches the place of no pity, 
      the position of rationality and common sense becomes weak.
            Silent knowledge is something that all of us have, something that 
      has complete mastery, complete knowledge of everything. But it cannot 
      think, therefore, it cannot speak of what is know.
            Sorcerers believe that when man became aware that he knew, and 
      wanted to be conscious of what he knew, he lost sight of what he knew. 
      This silent knowledge, which you cannot describe, is, of course, intent 
      --the spirit, the abstract. Man's error was to want to know it directly, 
      the way he knew everyday life. The more he wanted, the more ephemeral it 
      became.
            Man gave up silent knowledge for the world of reason. The more he 
      clings to the world of reason, the more ephemeral intent becomes.
            * * *
            The origin of the anxiety that overtakes an apprentice with the 
      speed of wildfire is the sudden movement of his assemblage point. Get used 
      to the idea of recurrent attacks of anxiety, because your assemblage point 
      is going to keep moving.
            Any movement of the assemblage point is like dying. Everything in us 
      gets disconnected, then reconnected again to a source of much greater 
      power. That amplification of energy is felt as a killing anxiety. When 
      this happens, just wait. The outburst of energy will pass. What's 
      dangerous in not knowing what is happening to you. Once you know, there is 
      no real danger.
            Ancient man knew, in the most direct fashion, what to do and how 
      best to do it. But, because he performed so well, he started to develop a 
      sense of selfness, which gave him the feeling that he could predict and 
      plan the actions he was used to performing. And thus the idea of an 
      individual "self" appeared; an individual self which began to dictate the 
      nature and scope of man's actions.
            As the feeling of the individual self became stronger, man lost his 
      natural connection to silent knowledge. Modern man, being heir to that 
      development, therefore finds himself so hopelessly removed from the source 
      of everything that all he can do is express his despair in violent and 
      cynical acts of self-destruction. The reason for man's cynicism and 
      despair is the bit of silent knowledge left in him, which does two things: 
      one, it gives man an inkling of his ancient connection to the source of 
      everything; and two, it makes man feel that without this connection, he 
      has no hope of peace, of satisfaction, of attainment.
            War is the natural state for a warrior, and peace is an anomaly. But 
      war, for a warrior, doesn't mean acts of individual or collective 
      stupidity or wanton violence. War, for a warrior, is the total struggle 
      against that individual self that has deprived man of his power.
            Ruthlessness is the most basic premise of sorcery. Any movement of 
      the assemblage point means a movement away from the excessive concern with 
      the individual self.
            Self-importance is the force generated by man's self-image. It is 
      that force which keeps the assemblage point fixed where it is at present. 
      For this reason, the thrust of the warrior's way is to dethrone 
      self-importance. And everything sorcerers do is toward accomplishing this 
      goal.
            Sorcerers have unmasked self-importance and found that it is 
      self-pity masquerading as something else. It doesn't sound possible, but 
      that is what it is. Self-pity is the real enemy and the source of man's 
      misery. Without a degree of pity for himself, man could not afford to be 
      as self-importance as he is. However, once the force of self-importance is 
      engaged, it develops its own momentum. And it is this seemingly 
      independent nature of self-importance which gives it its fake sense of 
      worth.
            Sorcerers are absolutely convinced that by moving our assemblage 
      points away from their customary position we achieve a state of being 
      which could only be called ruthlessness. Sorcerers know, by means of their 
      practical actions, that as soon as their assemblage points move, their 
      self-importance crumbles. Without the customary position of their 
      assemblage points, their self-image can no longer be sustained. And 
      without the heavy focus on that self-image, they lose their 
      self-compassion, and with it their self-importance. Sorcerers are right, 
      therefore, in saying that self-importance is merely self-pity in disguise.
            * * *
            A nagual in his role as leader or teacher has to behave in the most 
      efficient, but at the same time most impeccable, way. Since it is not 
      possible for him to plan the course of his actions rationally, the nagual 
      always lets the spirit decide his course.
            * * *
            The position of self-reflection forces the assemblage point to 
      assemble a world of sham compassion, but of very real cruelty and 
      self-centeredness. In that world the only real feelings are those 
      convenient for the one who feelings them.
            For a sorcerer, ruthlessness is not cruelty. Ruthlessness is the 
      opposite of self-pity or self-importance. Ruthlessness is sobriety.
            
            Sorcerers' increased energy, derived from the curtailment of their 
      self-reflection, allows their senses a greater range of perception.
            The only worthwhile course of action, whether for sorcerers or 
      average men, is to restrict our involvement with our self-image. What a 
      nagual aims at with his apprentices is the shattering of their mirror of 
      self-reflection.
            Each of us has a different degree of attachment to his 
      self-reflection. And that attachment is felt as need.
            It is possible for sorcerers, or average men, to need no one, to get 
      peace, harmony, laughter, knowledge, directly from the spirit--to need no 
      intermediaries. For you and for me, its different. I'm your intermediary 
      and my teacher was mine. Intermediaries, besides providing a minimal 
      chance--the awareness of intent --help shatter peoples mirrors of 
      self-reflection.
            The only concrete help you ever get from me is that I attack your 
      self-reflection. If it weren't for that, you would be wasting your time. 
      This is the only real help you've gotten from me.
            I've taught you all kinds of things in order to trap your attention. 
      You'll swear, though, that that teaching has been the important part. It 
      hasn't. There is very little value in instruction. Sorcerers maintain that 
      moving the assemblage point is all that matters. And that movement depends 
      on increased energy and not on instruction.
            Any human being who would follow a specific and simple sequence of 
      actions can learn to move his assemblage point. The sequence of actions I 
      am talking about is one that stems from being aware. The nagual provides a 
      minimal chance, but that minimal chance is not instruction, like the 
      instruction you need to learn to operate a machine. The minimal chance 
      consists of being made aware of the spirit.
            The specific sequence I have in mind calls for being aware that 
      self-importance is the force which keeps the assemblage point fixed. When 
      self-importance is curtailed, the energy it requires is no longer 
      expended. That increased energy then serves as the springboard that 
      launches the assemblage point, automatically and without premeditation, 
      into an inconceivable journey.
            Once the assemblage point has moved, the movement itself entails 
      moving from self-reflection, and this, in turn, assures a clear connecting 
      link with the spirit. After all, it is self-reflection that has 
      disconnected man from the spirit in the first place.
            As I have already said to you, sorcery is a journey of return. We 
      return victorious to the spirit, having descended into hell. And from hell 
      we bring trophies. Understanding is one of our trophies.
            Our difficulty with this simple progression is that most of us are 
      unwilling to accept that we need so little to get on with. We are geared 
      to expect instruction, teaching, guides, masters. And when we are told 
      that we need no one, we don't believe it. We become nervous, then 
      distrustful, and finally angry and disappointed. If we need help, it is 
      not in methods, but in emphasis. If someone makes us aware that we need to 
      curtail our self-importance, that help is real.
            Sorcerers say we should need no one to convince us that the world is 
      infinitely more complex than our wildest fantasies. So, why are we 
      dependent? Why do we crave someone to guide us when we can do it 
      ourselves? Big question, eh?
            The spirit moves the assemblage point. I have insisted to the point 
      of exhaustion that there are no procedures in sorcery. There are no 
      methods, no steps. The only thing that matters is the movement of the 
      assemblage point. And no procedure can cause that. It's an effect that 
      happens all by itself.
            The nagual entices the assemblage point into moving by helping to 
      destroy the mirror of self-reflection. But that is all the nagual can do. 
      The actual mover is the spirit, the abstract; something that cannot be 
      seen or felt; something that does not seem to exist, and yet does. For 
      this reason, sorcerers report that the assemblage point moves all by 
      itself.
            Because the spirit has no perceivable essence, sorcerers deal rather 
      with the specific instances and ways in which they are able to shatter the 
      mirror of self-reflection.
            The world of our self-reflection or of our mind is very flimsy and 
      is held together by a few key ideas that serve as its underlying order. 
      When those ideas fail, the underlying order ceases to function.
            Continuity is the key idea. Continuity is the idea that we are a 
      solid block. In our minds, what sustains our world is the certainty that 
      we are unchangeable.
            * * *
            I've described to you in the past the concept of stopping the world 
      and that it is as necessary for sorcerers as reading and writing are for 
      the average man. It consists of introducing a dissonant element into the 
      fabric of everyday behavior for purposes of halting the otherwise smooth 
      flow of ordinary events--events which are catalogued in our minds by our 
      reason.
            The dissonant element is called not-doing , or the opposite of doing 
      . Doing is anything that is part of a whole for which we have a cognitive 
      account. Not-doing is an element that does not belong in that charted 
      whole.
            Sorcerers, because they are stalkers , understand human behavior to 
      perfection. They understand, for instance, that human beings are creatures 
      of inventory. Knowing the ins and outs of a particular inventory is what 
      makes a man a scholar or an expert in his field.
            Sorcerers know that when an average person's inventory fails, the 
      person either enlarges his inventory or his world of self-reflection 
      collapses. The average person is willing to incorporate new items into his 
      inventory if they don't contradict the inventory's underlying order. But 
      if the items contradict that order, the person's mind collapses. The 
      inventory is the mind. Sorcerers count on this when they attempt to break 
      the mirror of self-reflection.
            * * *
            Intent is intended with the eyes. I know that it is so. Yet, just 
      like you, I can't pinpoint what it is I know. Sorcerers resolve this 
      particular difficulty by accepting something extremely obvious: human 
      beings are infinitely more complex and mysterious than our wildest 
      fantasies.
            All I can say is that the eyes do it. I don't know how, but they do 
      it. They summon intent with something indefinable that they have, 
      something in their shine. Sorcerers say that intent is experienced with 
      the eyes, not with the reason.
            * * *
            Continuity is so important in our lives that if it breaks it's 
      always instantly repaired. In the case of sorcerers, however, once their 
      assemblage points reach the place of no pity, continuity is never the 
same.
            
            You are dealing with a new type of continuity. It takes time to get 
      used to it. Warriors spend years in limbo where they are neither average 
      men nor sorcerers. The difficulty is that the mirror of self-reflection is 
      extremely powerful and only lets its victims go after a ferocious 
struggle.
            * * *
            There is something called a silent protector. It is a lifesaver, a 
      surge of inexplicable energy that comes to a warrior when nothing else 
      works. Sorcerers' options are silent protectors. They are positions of the 
      assemblage point. The infinite number of positions which the assemblage 
      point can reach. In each and every one of those shallow or deep shifts, a 
      sorcerer can strengthen his new continuity.
            The effect of those shifts of the assemblage point is cumulative. It 
      weighs on you whether you understand it or not.
            * * *
            Don't wish for death, just wait until it comes. Don't try to imagine 
      what it's like. Just be there to be caught in its flow.
            * * *
            The sorcerers' struggle for assuredness is the most dramatic 
      struggle there is. It's painful and costly. Many, many times it has 
      actually cost sorcerers their lives.
            In order for any sorcerer to have complete certainty about his 
      actions, or about his position in the sorcerers' world, or to be capable 
      of utilizing intelligently his new continuity, he must invalidate the 
      continuity of his old life. Only then can his actions have the necessary 
      assuredness to fortify and balance the tenuousness and instability of his 
      new continuity.
            The sorcerer seers of modern times call this process of invalidation 
      the ticket to impeccability, or the sorcerers' symbolic but final death.
            * * *
            Sorcerers have a peculiar bent. They live exclusively in the 
      twilight of a feeling best described by the words "and yet..." When 
      everything is crumbling down around them, sorcerers accept that the 
      situation is terrible, and then immediately escape to the twilight of "and 
      yet..."
            * * *
            Warriors do their utmost, and then, without any remorse or regrets, 
      they relax and let the spirit decide the outcome. The decision of the 
      spirit is another basic core. Sorcery stories are built around it.
            * * *
            A sorcerer's ticket to freedom is his death. I myself have paid with 
      my life for that ticket to freedom, as has everyone else in my household. 
      And now we are equals in our condition of being dead.
            You too are dead. The sorcerers' grand trick, however, is to be 
      aware that they are dead. Their ticket to impeccability must be wrapped in 
      awareness. In that wrapping, sorcerers say, their ticket is kept in mint 
      condition.
            
            Explanations are never wasted, because they are imprinted in us for 
      immediate or later use or to help prepare our way to reaching silent 
      knowledge.
            Silent knowledge is a general position of the assemblage point. Ages 
      ago it was man's normal position, but, for reasons which would be 
      impossible to determine, man's assemblage point moved away from that 
      specific location and adopted a new one called "reason."
            The place of no pity, being another position of the assemblage 
      point, is the forerunner of silent knowledge, and yet another position of 
      the assemblage point called "the place of concern," is the forerunner of 
      reason.
            * * *
            Death is painful only when it happens in one's bed, in sickness. In 
      a fight for your life, you feel no pain. If you feel anything, it's 
      exultation.
            One of the most dramatic differences between civilized men and 
      sorcerers is the way in which death comes to them. Only with 
      sorcerer-warriors is death kind and sweet. They could be mortally wounded 
      and yet would feel no pain. And what is even more extraordinary is that 
      death holds itself in abeyance for as long as the sorcerers need it to do 
      so. The greatest difference between an average man and a sorcerer is that 
      a sorcerer commands his death with his speed.
            In the world of everyday life our word or our decisions can be 
      reversed very easily. The only irrevocable thing in our world is death. In 
      the sorcerers' world, on the other hand, normal death can be 
      countermanded, but not the sorcerers' word. In the sorcerers' world 
      decisions cannot be changed or revised. Once they have been made, they 
      stand forever.
            * * *
            For a seer human beings are either oblong or spherical luminous 
      masses of countless, static, yet vibrant fields of energy, and only 
      sorcerers are capable of injecting movement into those spheres of static 
      luminosity. In a millisecond they can move their assemblage points to any 
      place in their luminous mass. That movement and the speed with which it is 
      performed entails an instantaneous shift into the perception of another 
      totally different universe. Or they can move their assemblage points, 
      without stopping, across their entire fields of luminous energy. The force 
      created by such movement is so intense that it instantly consumes their 
      whole luminous mass.
            * * *
            Possibly every human being under normal living conditions has had at 
      one time or another the opportunity to break away from the bindings of 
      convention. I don't mean social convention, but the conventions binding 
      our perception. A moment of elation would suffice to move our assemblage 
      points and break our conventions. So, too, a moment of fright, ill health, 
      anger, or grief. But ordinarily, whenever we have the chance to move our 
      assemblage points we become frightened. Our religious, academic, social 
      backgrounds come into play. They assure our safe return to the flock; the 
      return of our assemblage points to the prescribed position of normal 
      living.
            All the mystics and spiritual teachers you know of have done just 
      that: their assemblage points moved, either through discipline or 
      accident, to a certain point; and then they returned to normalcy carrying 
      a memory that lasted them a lifetime.
            The average man, incapable of finding the energy to perceive beyond 
      his daily limits, calls the realm of extraordinary perception sorcery, 
      witchcraft, or the work of the devil, and shies away from it without 
      examining it further.
            Turn everything into what it really is: the abstract, the spirit, 
      the nagual . There is no witchcraft, no evil, no devil. There is only 
      perception.
            Your assemblage point can move beyond the place of no pity into the 
      place of silent knowledge. To manipulate it yourself means you have enough 
      energy to move between reason and silent knowledge at will. If a sorcerer 
      has enough energy--or even if he does not have sufficient energy but needs 
      to shift because it is a matter of life and death--he can fluctuate 
      between reason and silent knowledge.
            At this stage in your development, any movement of your assemblage 
      point will still be a mystery. Your challenge at the beginning of your 
      apprenticeship is maintaining your gains, rather than reasoning them out. 
      At some point everything will make sense to you.
            You have to be able to explain knowledge to yourself before you can 
      claim that it makes sense to you. For a movement of your assemblage point 
      to make sense, you will need to have energy to fluctuate from the place of 
      reason to the place of silent knowledge.
            Your assemblage point can move by itself. You can intend the 
      movement by manipulating certain feelings and in so doing your assemblage 
      point can reach the position of silent knowledge.
            One way to talk about the perception attained in the place of silent 
      knowledge is to call it "here and here."
            * * *
            Intending the movement of the assemblage point is a great 
      accomplishment. But accomplishment is something personal. It's necessary, 
      but it's not the important part. It is not the residue sorcerers look 
      forward to. The idea of the abstract, the spirit, is the only residue that 
      is important. The idea of the personal self has no value whatsoever. Every 
      time I've had the chance, I have made you aware of the need to abstract. 
      You have always believed that I meant to think abstractly. No. To abstract 
      means to make yourself available to the spirit by being aware of it.
            One of the most dramatic things about the human condition is the 
      macabre connection between stupidity and self-reflection.
            It is stupidity that forces us to discard anything that does not 
      conform with our self-reflective expectations. For example, as average 
      men, we are blind to the most crucial piece of knowledge available to a 
      human being: the existence of the assemblage point and the fact that it 
      can move.
            For a rational man it's unthinkable that there should be an 
      invisible point where perception is assembled.
            For the rational man to hold steadfastly to his self-image insures 
      his abysmal ignorance. He ignores, for instance, the fact that sorcery is 
      not incantations and hocus-pocus, but the freedom to perceive not only the 
      world taken for granted, but everything else that is humanly possible.
            Here is where the average man's stupidity is most dangerous; he is 
      afraid of sorcery. He trembles at the possibility of freedom. And freedom 
      is at his fingertips. It's called the third point. And it can be reached 
      as easily as the assemblage point can be made to move.
            This is another of the sorcerers' contradictions: it's very 
      difficult and yet it's the simplest thing in the world. I've told you 
      already that a high fever could move the assemblage point. Hunger or fear 
      or love or hate could do it; mysticism too, and also unbending intent , 
      which is the preferred method of sorcerers.
            Unbending intent is a sort of single-mindedness human beings 
      exhibit; an extremely well-defined purpose not countermanded by any 
      conflicting interests or desires; unbending intent is also the force 
      engendered when the assemblage point is maintained fixed in a position 
      which is not the usual one.
            The distinction between a movement and a shift of the assemblage 
      point is that a movement is a profound change of position, so extreme that 
      the assemblage point might even reach other bands of energy within our 
      total luminous mass of energy fields. Each band of energy represents a 
      completely different universe to be perceived. A shift, however, is a 
      small movement within the band of energy fields we perceive as the world 
      of everyday life.
            Sorcerers see unbending intent as the catalyst to trigger their 
      unchangeable decisions, or as the converse: their unchangeable decisions 
      are the catalyst that propels their assemblage points to new positions, 
      positions which in turn generate unbending intent .
            Trying to reason out the sorcerers' metaphorical descriptions is as 
      useless as trying to reason out silent knowledge.
            The world of daily life consists of two points of reference. We have 
      for example, here and there, in and out, up and down, good and evil, and 
      so on and so forth. So, properly speaking, our perception of our lives is 
      two-dimensional. None of what we perceive ourselves doing has depth.
            A sorcerer perceives his actions with depth. His actions are 
      tridimensional for him. They have a third point of reference.
            Our points of reference are obtained primarily from our sense 
      perception. Our senses perceive and differentiate what is immediate to us 
      from what is not. Using that basic distinction we derive the rest.
            In order to reach the third point of reference one must perceive two 
      places at once.
            Normal perception has an axis. "Here and there" are the perimeters 
      of that axis, and we are partial to the clarity of "here." In normal 
      perception, only "here" is perceived completely, instantaneously, and 
      directly. Its twin referent, "there," lacks immediacy. It is inferred, 
      deduced, expected, even assumed, but it is not apprehended directly with 
      all the senses. When we perceive two places at once, total clarity is 
      lost, but the immediate perception of "there" is gained.
            * * *
            A sorcerer, because he has a connecting link with intent , sees an 
      oddity as a vehicle to perceiving--not an oddity, but a source of awe.
            * * *
            Only sorcerers can turn their feelings into intent . Intent is the 
      spirit, so it is the spirit which moves their assemblage points.
            The misleading part of all this is that I am saying only sorcerers 
      know about the spirit, that intent is the exclusive domain of sorcerers. 
      This is not true at all, but it is the situation in the realm of 
      practicality. The real condition is that sorcerers are more aware of their 
      connection with the spirit than the average man and strive to manipulate 
      it. That's all. I've already told you, the connecting link with intent is 
      the universal feature shared by everything there is.
            Being in two places at once is a milestone sorcerers use to mark the 
      moment the assemblage point reaches the place of silent knowledge. Split 
      perception, if accomplished by one's own means, is called the free 
      movement of the assemblage point.
            Every apprentice must consistently do everything within his power to 
      encourage the free movement of his assemblage point. This all-out effort 
      is cryptically called "reaching out for the third point."
            The third point of reference is freedom of perception; it is intent 
      ; it is the spirit; the somersault of thought into the miraculous; the act 
      of reaching beyond our boundaries and touching the inconceivable.
            
            To discover the possibility of being in two places at once is very 
      exciting to the mind. Since our minds are our rationality, and our 
      rationality is our self-reflection, anything beyond our self-reflection 
      either appalls us or attracts us, depending on what kind of persons we 
are.
            In terms of his connection with intent , a warrior goes through four 
      stages. The first is when he has a rusty, untrustworthy link with intent . 
      The second is when he succeeds in cleaning it. The third is when he learns 
      to manipulate it. And the fourth is when he learns to accept the designs 
      of the abstract.
            Your disadvantage in the sorcerers' world is your lack of 
      familiarity with it. In that world you have to relate yourself to 
      everything in a new way, which is infinitely more difficult, because it 
      has very little to do with your everyday life continuity.
            The specific problem of sorcerers is two-fold. One is the 
      impossibility of restoring a shattered continuity; the other is the 
      impossibility of using the continuity dictated by the new position of 
      their assemblage points. That new continuity is always too tenuous, too 
      unstable, and does not offer sorcerers the assuredness they need to 
      function as if they were in the world of everyday life.
            Sorcerers don't resolve this problem. The spirit either resolves it 
      for us or it doesn't. If it does, a sorcerer finds himself acting in the 
      sorcerers' world, but without knowing how. This is the reason why I have 
      insisted from the day I found you that impeccability is all that counts. A 
      sorcerer lives an impeccable life, and that seems to beckon the solution. 
      Why? No one knows.
            Impeccability, as I have told you so many times, is not morality, it 
      only resembles morality. Impeccability is simply the best use of our 
      energy level. Naturally, it calls for frugality, thoughtfulness, 
      simplicity, innocence; and above all, it calls for lack of 
      self-reflection. All this makes it sound like a manual for monastic life, 
      but it isn't.
            Sorcerers say that in order to command the spirit, and by that they 
      mean to command the movement of the assemblage point, one needs energy. 
      The only thing that stores energy for us is our impeccability.
            We do not have to be students of sorcery to move our assemblage 
      point. Sometimes, due to natural although dramatic circumstances, such as 
      war, deprivation, stress, fatigue, sorrow, helplessness, men's assemblage 
      points undergo profound movements. If the men who find themselves in such 
      circumstances are able to adopt a sorcerer's ideology, they would be able 
      to maximize that natural movement with no trouble. And they would seek and 
      find extraordinary things instead of doing what men do in such 
      circumstances: crave the return to normalcy.
            When a movement of the assemblage point is maximized, both the 
      average man or the apprentice in sorcery becomes a sorcerer, because by 
      maximizing that movement, continuity is shattered beyond repair.
            You maximize that movement by curtailing self-reflection. Moving the 
      assemblage point or breaking one's continuity is not the real difficulty. 
      The real difficulty is having energy. If one has energy, once the 
      assemblage point moves, inconceivable things are there for the asking.
            Man's predicament is that he intuits his hidden resources, but he 
      does not dare use them. This is why sorcerers say that man's plight is the 
      counterpoint between his stupidity and his ignorance. Man needs now, more 
      so than ever, to be taught new ideas that have to do exclusively with his 
      inner world--sorcerers' ideas, not social ideas, ideas pertaining to man 
      facing the unknown, facing his personal death. Now, more than anything 
      else, he needs to be taught the secrets of the assemblage point.
            * * *
            The spirit is indefinable. One cannot even feel it, much less talk 
      about it. One can only beckon it by acknowledging its existence.
            * * *
            The position of silent knowledge is called the third point because 
      in order to get to it one has to pass the second point, the place of no 
      pity.
            Every human being has a capacity for that fluidity. For most of us, 
      however, it is stored away and we never use it, except on rare occasions 
      which are brought about by sorcerers, or by dramatic natural 
      circumstances, such as a life-or-death struggle.
            Only a human being who is a paragon of reason can move his 
      assemblage point easily and be a paragon of silent knowledge. Only those 
      who are squarely in either position can see the other position clearly. 
      That was the way the age of reason came to being. The position of reason 
      was clearly seen from the position of silent knowledge.
            The one-way bridge from silent knowledge to reason is called 
      "concern." That is, the concern that true men of silent knowledge have 
      about the source of what they know. And the other one-way bridge, from 
      reason to silent knowledge, is called "pure understanding." That is, the 
      recognition that tells the man of reason that reason is only one island in 
      an endless sea of islands.
            A human being who has both one-way bridges working is a sorcerer in 
      direct contact with the spirit, the vital force that makes both positions 
      possible.
            * * *
            The spirit only listens when the speaker speaks in gestures. And 
      gestures do not mean signs or body movements, but acts of true abandon, 
      acts of largesse, of humor. As a gesture for the spirit, sorcerers bring 
      out the best of themselves and silently offer it to the abstract.
            
            Sorcerers count their lives in hours. In one hour it is possible for 
      a sorcerer to live the equivalent in intensity of a normal life. This 
      intensity is an advantage when it comes to storing information in the 
      movement of the assemblage point.
            The assemblage point, with even the most minute shifting, creates 
      totally isolated islands of perception. Information, in the form of 
      experiences in the complexity of awareness can be stored there. But how 
      can information be stored in something so vague? The mind is equally 
      vague, and still you trust it because you are familiar with it. You don't 
      yet have the same familiarity with the movement of the assemblage point, 
      but it is just about the same.
            The information is stored in the experience itself. Later, when a 
      sorcerer moves his assemblage point to the exact spot where it was, he 
      relives the total experience. This sorcerers' recollection is the way to 
      get back all the information stored in the movement of the assemblage 
      point.
            Intensity is an automatic result of the movement of the assemblage 
      point. Intensity, being an aspect of intent , is connected naturally to 
      the shine of the sorcerers' eyes. In order to recall those isolated 
      islands of perception sorcerers need only intent the particular shine of 
      their eyes associated with whichever spot they want to return to.
            Because his intensity rate is greater than normal, in a few hours a 
      sorcerer can live the equivalent of a normal lifetime. His assemblage 
      point, by shifting to an unfamiliar position, takes in more energy than 
      usual. That extra flow of energy is called intensity.
            Beware of a reaction which typically afflicts sorcerers--a 
      frustrating desire to explain the sorcery experience in cogent, 
      well-reasoned terms.
            The sorcerers' experience is so outlandish that sorcerers consider 
      it an intellectual exercise, and use it to stalk themselves with. Their 
      trump card as stalkers , though, is that they remain keenly aware that we 
      are perceivers and that perception has more possibilities than the mind 
      can conceive.
            In order to protect themselves from that immensity, sorcerers learn 
      to maintain a perfect blend of ruthlessness, cunning, patience, and 
      sweetness. These four bases are inextricably bound together. Sorcerers 
      cultivate them by intending them. These bases are, naturally, positions of 
      the assemblage point.
            Every act performed by any sorcerer is by definition governed by 
      these four principles. So, properly speaking, every sorcerer's every 
      action is deliberate in thought and realization, and has the specific 
      blend of the four foundations of stalking .
            Sorcerers use the four moods of stalking as guides. These are four 
      different frames of mind, four different brands of intensity that 
      sorcerers can use to induce their assemblage points to move to specific 
      positions.
            Our tendency is to ponder, to question, to find out. And there is no 
      way to do that from within the discipline of sorcery. Sorcery is the act 
      of reaching the place of silent knowledge, and silent knowledge can't be 
      reasoned out. It can only be experienced.
            Sorcerers, in an effort to protect themselves from the overwhelming 
      effect of silent knowledge, developed the art of stalking . Stalking moves 
      the assemblage point minutely but steadily, thus giving sorcerers time and 
      therefore the possibility of buttressing themselves.
            Within the art of stalking there is a technique which sorcerers use 
      a great deal: controlled folly. Sorcerers claim that controlled folly is 
      the only way they have of dealing with themselves--in their state of 
      expanded awareness and perception--and with everybody and everything in 
      the world of daily affairs.
            Controlled folly is the art of controlled deception or the art of 
      pretending to be thoroughly immersed in the action at hand--pretending so 
      well no one could tell it from the real thing. Controlled folly is not an 
      outright deception but a sophisticated, artistic way of being separated 
      from everything while remaining an integral part of everything.
            Controlled folly is an art. A very bothersome art, and a difficult 
      one to learn. Many sorcerers don't have the stomach for it, not because 
      there is anything inherently wrong with the art, but because it takes a 
      lot of energy to exercise it.
            By the time we come to sorcery, our personality is already formed 
      and all we can do is practice controlled folly and laugh at ourselves.
            * * *
            Stalkers who practice controlled folly believe that, in matters of 
      personality, the entire human race falls into three categories. Sorcerers 
      long age learned that only our personal self-reflection falls into one of 
      the categories.
            The trouble with us is that we take ourselves seriously. Whichever 
      category our self-image falls into only matters because of our 
      self-importance. If we weren't self-important, it wouldn't matter at all 
      which category we fell into.
            * * *
            The basic cores reveal themselves extremely slowly, erratically 
      advancing and retreating. I can't repeat often enough that every man whose 
      assemblage point moves can move it further. And the only reason we need a 
      teacher is to spur us on mercilessly. Otherwise our natural reaction is to 
      stop to congratulate ourselves for having covered so much ground.
            * * *
            Self-importance is a monster that has three thousand heads. And one 
      can face up to it and destroy it in any of three ways. The first way is to 
      sever each head one at a time; the second is to reach that mysterious 
      state of being called the place of no pity, which destroys self-importance 
      by slowly starving it; and the third is to pay for the instantaneous 
      annihilation of the three-thousand-headed monster with one's symbolic 
      death.
            Consider yourself fortunate if you get the chance to choose. For it 
      is the spirit that usually determines which way the sorcerer is to go, and 
      it is the duty of the sorcerer to follow.
            * * *
            The place of no pity is a position of the assemblage point, a 
      position which renders self-pity inoperative.
            * * *
            Appearance is the essence of controlled folly, and stalkers create 
      appearances by intending them. Intending appearances is exclusively an 
      exercise for stalkers .
            Stalkers call intent . The indispensable part of the act of calling 
      intent is a total concentration on what is intended .
            * * *
            Man has a dark side. It's called stupidity. In the same measure that 
      ritual forced the average man to construct huge churches that were 
      monuments to self-importance, ritual also forced sorcerers to construct 
      edifices of morbidity and obsession. As a result, it is the duty of every 
      nagual to guide awareness so it will fly toward the abstract, free of 
      liens and mortgages.
            Ritual can trap our attention better than anything I can think of. 
      But it also demands a very high price. That high price is morbidity; and 
      morbidity could have the heaviest liens and mortgages on our awareness.
            Human awareness is like an immense haunted house. The awareness of 
      everyday life is like being sealed in one room of that immense house for 
      life. We enter the room through a magical opening: birth. And we exit 
      through another such magical opening: death.
            Sorcerers, however, are capable of finding still another opening and 
      can leave that sealed room while still alive. A superb attainment. But 
      their astounding accomplishment is that when they escape from that sealed 
      room they choose freedom. They choose to leave that immense, haunted house 
      entirely instead of getting lost in other parts of it.
            Morbidity is the antithesis of the surge of energy awareness needs 
      to reach freedom. Morbidity makes sorcerers lose their way and become 
      trapped in the intricate, dark byways of the unknown.
            Stalkers who intend appearances are performers who are being coached 
      by the spirit itself. The teacher's reason for training an apprentice as 
      he does is freedom. He wants their freedom from perceptual convention. And 
      he teaches them to be artists. Stalking is an art. For a sorcerer, since 
      he's not a patron or a seller of art, the only thing of importance about a 
      work of art is that it can be accomplished.
            * * *
            Think about the basic cores of the sorcery stories. Or rather, don't 
      think about them, but make your assemblage point move toward the place of 
      silent knowledge. Moving the assemblage point is everything, but it means 
      nothing if it's not a sober, controlled movement. So, close the door of 
      self-reflection. Be impeccable and you'll have the energy to reach the 
      place of silent knowledge.



      <
      Introduction
      1. The Teachings of don Juan
      2. A Separate Reality
      3. Journey to Ixtlan
      4. Tales Of Power
      5. The Second Ring of Power
      6. The Eagle's Gift
      7. The Fire From Within
      8. The Power of Silence
      9. The Art of Dreaming
      12. The Active Side of Infinity
      13. Appendix A thru E
      14. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part l
      15. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part ll
      16. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part lll
      17. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part lV
      18. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part V
      19. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part Vl
      20. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part Vll
      21. Dialogue on the Way of Knowledge - Part VllI
      Please send e-mail to me by clicking on my name.Rick Mace
      My pottery page is here. Rick Mace Pottery 



       

