Roald Dahl: George's Marvellous MedicineROALD DAHL
George's Marvellous Medicine





WARNING TO READERS: Do not try to make George's Marvellous Medicine yourselves 
at home. It could be dangerous.






Grandma


'I'm going shopping in the village,' George's mother said to George on Saturday 
morning. 'So be a good boy and don't get up to mischief.'
This was a silly thing to say to a small boy at any time. It immediately made 
him wonder what sort of mischief he might get up to.
'And don't forget to give Grandma her medicine at eleven o'clock,' the mother 
said. Then out she went, closing the back door behind her.
Grandma, who was dozing in her chair by the window, opened one wicked little eye 
and said, 'Now you heard what your mother said, George. Don't forget my 
medicine.'
'No, Grandma,' George said.
'And just try to behave yourself for once while she's away.'
'Yes, Grandma,' George said.
George was bored to tears. He didn't have a brother or a sister. His father was 
a farmer and the farm they lived on was miles away from anywhere, so there were 
never any children to play with. He was tired of staring at pigs and hens and 
cows and sheep. He was especially tired of having to live in the same house as 
that grizzly old grunion of a Grandma. Looking after her all by himself was 
hardly the most exciting way to spend a Saturday morning.
'You can make me a nice cup of tea for a start,' Grandma said to George. 
'That'll keep you out of mischief for a few minutes.'
'Yes, Grandma,' George said.
George couldn't help disliking Grandma. She was a selfish grumpy old woman. She 
had pale brown teeth and a small puckered up mouth like a dog's bottom.
'How much sugar in your tea today, Grandma?' George asked her.
'One spoon,' she said. 'And no milk.'
Most grandmothers are lovely, kind, helpful old ladies, but not this one. She 
spent all day and every day sitting in her chair by the window, and she was 
always complaining, grousing, grouching, grumbling, griping about something or 
other. Never once, even on her best days, had she smiled at George and said, 
'Well, how are you this morning, George?' or 'Why don't you and I have a game of 
Snakes and Ladders?' or 'How was school today?' She didn't seem to care about 
other people, only about herself. She was a miserable old grouch.
George went into the kitchen and made Grandma a cup of tea with a teabag. He put 
one spoon of sugar in it and no milk. He stirred the sugar well and carried the 
cup into the living-room.
Grandma sipped the tea. 'It's not sweet enough,' she said. Put more sugar in.'
George took the cup back to the kitchen and added another spoonful of sugar. He 
stirred it again and carried it carefully in to Grandma.
'Where's the saucer?' she said. 'I won't have a cup without a saucer.'
George fetched her a saucer.
'And what about a teaspoon, if you please?'
'I've stirred it for you, Grandma. I stirred it well.'
'I'll stir my own tea, thank you very much,' she said. 'Fetch me a teaspoon.'
George fetched her a teaspoon.
When George's mother or father were home, Grandma never ordered George about 
like this. It was only when she had him on her own that she began treating him 
badly.
'You know what's the matter with you?' the old woman said, staring at George 
over the rim of the teacup with those bright wicked little eyes. 'You're growing 
too fast. Boys who grow too fast become stupid and lazy.'
'But I can't help it if I'm growing fast, Grandma,' George said.
'Of course you can,' she snapped. 'Growing's a nasty childish habit.'
'But we have to grow, Grandma. If we didn't grow, we'd never be grown-ups.'
'Rubbish, boy, rubbish,' she said. 'Look at me. Am I growing? Certainly not.'
'But you did once, Grandma.'
'Only very little,' the old woman answered. 'I gave up growing when I was 
extremely small, along with all the other nasty childish habits like laziness 
and disobedience and greed and sloppiness and untidiness and stupidity. You 
haven't given up any of these things, have you?'
'I'm still only a little boy, Grandma.'
'You're eight years old,' she snorted. 'That's old enough to know better. If you 
don't stop growing soon, it'll be too late.'
'Too late for what, Grandma?'
'It's ridiculous,' she went on. 'You're nearly as tall as me already.'
George took a good look at Grandma. She certainly was a very tiny person. Her 
legs were so short she had to have a footstool to put her feet on, and her head 
only came half-way up the back of the armchair.
'Daddy says it's fine for a man to be tall,' George said.
'Don't listen to your daddy,' Grandma said. 'Listen to me.'
'But how do I stop myself growing?' George asked her.
'Eat less chocolate,' Grandma said.
'Does chocolate make you grow?'
'It makes you grow the wrong way,' she snapped. 'Up instead of down.'
Grandma sipped some tea but never took her eyes from the little boy who stood 
before her. 'Never grow up,' she said. 'Always down.'
'Yes, Grandma.'
'And stop eating chocolate. Eat cabbage instead.'
'Cabbage! Oh no, I don't like cabbage,' George said.
'It's not what you like or what you don't like,' Grandma snapped. 'It's what's 
good for you that counts. From now on, you must eat cabbage three times a day. 
Mountains of cabbage! And if it's got caterpillars in it, so much the better!'
'Owch,' George said.
'Caterpillars give you brains,' the old woman said.
'Mummy washes them down the sink,' George said.
'Mummy's as stupid as you are,' Grandma said. 'Cabbage doesn't taste of anything 
without a few boiled caterpillars in it. Slugs, too.'
'Not slugs!' George cried out. 'I couldn't eat slugs!'
'Whenever I see a live slug on a piece of lettuce,' Grandma said, 'I gobble it 
up quick before it crawls away. Delicious.' She squeezed her lips together tight 
so that her mouth became a tiny wrinkled hole. 'Delicious,' she said again. 
'Worms and slugs and beetley bugs. You don't know what's good for you.'
'You're joking, Grandma.'
'I never joke,' she said. 'Beetles are perhaps best of all. They go crunch!'
'Grandma! That's beastly!'
The old hag grinned, showing those pale brown teeth. 'Sometimes, if you're 
lucky,' she said, 'you get a beetle inside the stem of a stick of celery. That's 
what I like.'
'Grandma! How could you?'
'You find all sorts of nice things in sticks of raw celery,' the old woman went 
on. 'Sometimes it's earwigs.'
'I don't want to hear about it!' cried George.
'A big fat earwig is very tasty,' Grandma said, licking her lips. 'But you've 
got to be very quick, my dear, when you put one of those in your mouth. It has a 
pair of sharp nippers on its back end and if it grabs your tongue with those, it 
never lets go. So you've got to bite the earwig first, chop chop, before it 
bites you.'
George started edging towards the door. He wanted to get as far away as possible 
from this filthy old woman.
'You're trying to get away from me, aren't you,' she said, pointing a finger 
straight at George's face. 'You're trying to get away from Grandma.'
Little George stood by the door staring at the old hag in the chair. She stared 
back at him.
Could it be, George wondered, that she was a witch? He had always thought 
witches were only in fairy tales, but now he was not so sure.
'Come closer to me, little boy,' she said, beckoning to him with a horny finger. 
'Come closer to me and I will tell you secrets.'
George didn't move.
Grandma didn't move either.
'I know a great many secrets,' she said, and suddenly she smiled. It was a thin 
icy smile, the kind a snake might make just before it bites you. 'Come over here 
to Grandma and she'll whisper secrets to you.'
George took a step backwards, edging closer to the door.
'You mustn't be frightened of your old Grandma,' she said, smiling that icy 
smile.
George took another step backwards.
'Some of us,' she said, and all at once she was leaning forward in her chair and 
whispering in a throaty sort of voice George had never heard her use before. 
'Some of us,' she said, 'have magic powers that can twist the creatures of this 
earth into wondrous shapes . . .'
A tingle of electricity flashed down the length of George's spine. He began to 
feel frightened.
'Some of us,' the old woman went on, 'have fire on our tongues and sparks in our 
bellies and wizardry in the tips of our fingers . . .
'Some of us know secrets that would make your hair stand straight up on end and 
your eyes pop out of their sockets . . .'
George wanted to run away, but his feet seemed stuck to the floor.
'We know how to make your nails drop off and teeth grow out of your fingers 
instead.'
George began to tremble. It was her face that frightened him most of all, the 
frosty smile, the brilliant unblinking eyes.
'We know how to have you wake up in the morning with a long tail coming out from 
behind you.'
'Grandma!' he cried out. 'Stop!'
'We know secrets, my dear, about dark places where dark things live and squirm 
and slither all over each other . . .'
George made a dive for the door.
'It doesn't matter how far you run,' he heard her saying, 'you won't ever get 
away . . .'
George ran into the kitchen, slamming the door behind him.


The Marvellous Plan


George sat himself down at the table in the kitchen. He was shaking a little. 
Oh, how he hated Grandma! He really hated that horrid old witchy woman. And all 
of a sudden he had a tremendous urge to do something about her. Something 
whopping. Something absolutely terrific. A real shocker. A sort of explosion. He 
wanted to blow away the witchy smell that hung about her in the next room. He 
may have been only eight years old but he was a brave little boy. He was ready 
to take this old woman on.
'I'm not going to be frightened by her,' he said softly to himself. But he was 
frightened. And that's why he wanted suddenly to explode her away.
Well . . . not quite away. But he did want to shake the old woman up a bit.
Very well, then. What should it be, this whopping terrific exploding shocker for 
Grandma?
He would have liked to put a firework banger under her chair but he didn't have 
one.
He would have liked to put a long green snake down the back of her dress but he 
didn't have a long green snake.
He would have liked to put six big black rats in the room with her and lock the 
door but he didn't have six big black rats.
As George sat there pondering this interesting problem, his eye fell upon the 
bottle of Grandma's brown medicine standing on the sideboard. Rotten stuff it 
seemed to be. Four times a day a large spoonful of it was shovelled into her 
mouth and it didn't do her the slightest bit of good. She was always just as 
horrid after she'd had it as she'd been before. The whole point of medicine, 
surely, was to make a person better. If it didn't do that, then it was quite 
useless.
So-ho! thought George suddenly. Ah-ha! Ho-hum! I know exactly what I'll do. I 
shall make her a new medicine, one that is so strong and so fierce and so 
fantastic it will either cure her completely or blow off the top of her head. 
I'll make her a magic medicine, a medicine no doctor in the world has ever made 
before.
George looked at the kitchen clock. It said five past ten. There was nearly an 
hour left before Grandma's next dose was due at eleven.
'Here we go, then!' cried George, jumping up from the table. 'A magic medicine 
it shall be!'


'So give me a bug and a jumping flea,
Give me two snails and lizards three,
And a slimy squiggler from the sea,
And the poisonous sting of a bumblebee,
And the juice from the fruit of the ju-jube tree,
And the powdered bone of a wombat's knee.
And one hundred other things as well
Each with a rather nasty smell.
I'll stir them up, I'll boil them long,
A mixture tough, a mixture strong.
And then, heigh-ho, and down it goes,
A nice big spoonful (hold your nose)
Just gulp it down and have no fear.
"How do you like it, Granny dear?"
Will she go pop? Will she explode?
Will she go flying down the road?
Will she go poof in a puff of smoke?
Start fizzing like a can of Coke?
Who knows? Not I. Let's wait and see.
(I'm glad it's neither you nor me.)
Oh Grandma, if you only knew
What I have got in store for you!'


George Begins to Make the Medicine


George took an enormous saucepan out of the cupboard and placed it on the 
kitchen table.
'George!' came the shrill voice from the next room. 'What are you doing?'
'Nothing, Grandma,' he called out.
'You needn't think I can't hear you just because you closed the door! You're 
rattling the saucepans!'
'I'm just tidying the kitchen, Grandma.'
Then there was silence.
George had absolutely no doubts whatsoever about how he was going to make his 
famous medicine. He wasn't going to fool about wondering whether to put in a 
little bit of this or a little bit of that. Quite simply, he was going to put in 
EVERYTHING he could find. There would be no messing about, no hesitating, no 
wondering whether a particular thing would knock the old girl sideways or not. 
The rule would be this: whatever he saw, if it was runny or powdery or gooey, in 
it went.
Nobody had ever made a medicine like that before. If it didn't actually cure 
Grandma, then it would anyway cause some exciting results. It would be worth 
watching.
George decided to work his way round the various rooms one at a time and see 
what they had to offer.
He would go first to the bathroom. There are always lots of funny things in a 
bathroom. So upstairs he went, carrying the enormous two-handled saucepan before 
him.
In the bathroom, he gazed longingly at the famous and dreaded medicine cupboard. 
But he didn't go near it. It was the only thing in the entire house he was 
forbidden to touch. He had made solemn promises to his parents about this and he 
wasn't going to break them. There were things in there, they had told him, that 
could actually kill a person, and although he was out to give Grandma a pretty 
fiery mouthful, he didn't really want a dead body on his hands. George put the 
saucepan on the floor and went to work.
Number one was a bottle labelled GOLDEN GLOSS HAIR SHAMPOO. He emptied it into 
the pan. 'That ought to wash her tummy nice and clean,' he said.
He took a full tube of TOOTHPASTE and squeezed out the whole lot of it in one 
long worm. 'Maybe that will brighten up those horrid brown teeth of hers,' he 
said.
There was an aerosol can of SUPERFOAM SHAVING SOAP belonging to his father. 
George loved playing with aerosols. He pressed the button and kept his finger on 
it until there was nothing left. A wonderful mountain of white foam built up in 
the giant saucepan.
With his fingers, he scooped out the contents of a jar of VITAMIN ENRICHED FACE 
CREAM.
In went a small bottle of scarlet NAIL VARNISH. 'If the toothpaste doesn't clean 
her teeth,' George said, 'then this will paint them as red as roses.'
He found another jar of creamy stuff labelled HAIR REMOVER. SMEAR IT ON YOUR 
LEGS, it said, AND ALLOW TO REMAIN FOR FIVE MINUTES. George tipped it all into 
the saucepan.
There was a bottle with yellow stuff inside it called DISHWORTH'S FAMOUS 
DANDRUFF CURE. In it went.
There was something called BRILLIDENT FOR CLEANING FALSE TEETH. It was a white 
powder. In that went, too.
He found another aerosol can, NEVERMORE PONKING DEODORANT SPRAY, GUARANTEED, it 
said, TO KEEP AWAY UNPLEASANT BODY SMELLS FOR A WHOLE DAY. 'She could use plenty 
of that,' George said as he sprayed the entire canful into the saucepan.
LIQUID PARAFFIN, the next one was called. It was a big bottle. He hadn't the 
faintest idea what it did to you, but he poured it in anyway.
That, he thought, looking around him, was about all from the bathroom.
On his mother's dressing-table in the bedroom, George found yet another lovely 
aerosol can. It was called HELGA'S HAIRSET. HOLD TWELVE INCHES AWAY FROM THE 
HAIR AND SPRAY LIGHTLY. He squirted the whole lot into the saucepan. He did 
enjoy squirting these aerosols.
There was a bottle of perfume called FLOWERS OF TURNIPS. It smelled of old 
cheese. In it went.
And in, too, went a large round box of POWDER. It was called PINK PLASTER. There 
was a powder-puff on top and he threw that in as well for luck.
He found a couple of LIPSTICKS. He pulled the greasy red things out of their 
little cases and added them to the mixture.
The bedroom had nothing more to offer, so George carried the enormous saucepan 
downstairs again and trotted into the laundry-room where the shelves were full 
of all kinds of household items.
The first one he took down was a large box of SUPERWHITE FOR AUTOMATIC 
WASHING-MACHINES. DIRT, it said, WILL DISAPPEAR LIKE MAGIC. George didn't know 
whether Grandma was automatic or not, but she was certainly a dirty old woman. 
'So she'd better have it all,' he said, tipping in the whole boxful.
Then there was a big tin of WAXWELL FLOOR POLISH. IT REMOVES FILTH AND FOUL 
MESSES FROM YOUR FLOOR AND LEAVES EVERYTHING SHINY BRIGHT, it said. George 
scooped the orange-coloured waxy stuff out of the tin and plonked it into the 
pan.
There was a round cardboard carton labelled FLEA POWDER FOR DOGS. KEEP WELL AWAY 
FROM THE DOG'S FOOD, it said, BECAUSE THIS POWDER, IF EATEN, WILL MAKE THE DOG 
EXPLODE. 'Good,' said George, pouring it all into the saucepan.
He found a box of CANARY SEED on the shelf. 'Perhaps it'll make the old bird 
sing,' he said, and in it went.
Next, George explored the box with shoe-cleaning materials — brushes and tins 
and dusters. Well now, he thought, Grandma's medicine is brown, so my medicine 
must also be brown or she'll smell a rat. The way to colour it, he decided, 
would be with BROWN SHOE-POLISH. The large tin he chose was labelled DARK TAN. 
Splendid. He scooped it all out with an old spoon and plopped it into the pan. 
He would stir it up later.
On his way back to the kitchen, George saw a bottle of GIN standing on the 
sideboard. Grandma was very fond of gin. She was allowed to have a small nip of 
it every evening. Now he would give her a treat. He would pour in the whole 
bottle. He did.
Back in the kitchen, George put the huge saucepan on the table and went over to 
the cupboard that served as a larder. The shelves were bulging with bottles and 
jars of every sort. He chose the following and emptied them one by one into the 
saucepan:
A TIN OF CURRY POWDER
A TIN OF MUSTARD POWDER
A BOTTLE OF 'EXTRA HOT' CHILLI SAUCE
A TIN OF BLACK PEPPERCORNS
A BOTTLE OF HORSERADISH SAUCE
'There!' he said aloud. 'That should do it!'
'George!' came the screechy voice from the next room. 'Who are you talking to in 
there? What are you up to?'
'Nothing, Grandma, absolutely nothing,' he called back.
'Is it time for my medicine yet?'
'No, Grandma, not for about half an hour.'
'Well, just see you don't forget it.'
'I won't, Grandma,' George answered. 'I promise I won't.'


Animal Pills


At this point, George suddenly had an extra good wheeze. Although the medicine 
cupboard in the house was forbidden ground, what about the medicines his father 
kept on the shelf in the shed next to the henhouse? The animal medicines?
What about those?
Nobody had ever told him he mustn't touch them.
Let's face it, George said to himself, hair-spray and shaving-cream and 
shoe-polish are all very well and they will no doubt cause some splendid 
explosions inside the old geezer, but what the magic mixture now needs is a 
touch of the real stuff, real pills and real tonics, to give it punch and 
muscle.
George picked up the heavy three-quarters full saucepan and carried it out of 
the back door. He crossed the farmyard and headed straight for the shed 
alongside the henhouse. He knew his father wouldn't be there. He was out 
haymaking in one of the meadows.
George entered the dusty old shed and put the saucepan on the bench. Then he 
looked up at the medicine shelf. There were five big bottles there. Two were 
full of pills, two were full of runny stuff and one was full of powder.
'I'll use them all,' George said. 'Grandma needs them. Boy, does she need them!'
The first bottle he took down contained an orange-coloured powder. The label 
said, FOR CHICKENS WITH FOUL PEST, HEN GRIPE, SORE BEAKS, GAMMY LEGS, 
COCKERELITIS, EGG TROUBLE, BROODINESS OR LOSS OF FEATHERS. MIX ONE SPOONFUL ONLY 
WITH EACH BUCKET OF FEED.
'Well,' George said aloud to himself as he tipped in the whole bottleful, 'the 
old bird won't be losing any feathers after she's had a dose of this.'
The next bottle he took down had about five hundred gigantic purple pills in it. 
FOR HORSES WITH HOARSE THROATS, it said on the label. THE HOARSE-THROATED HORSE 
SHOULD SUCK ONE PILL TWICE A DAY.
'Grandma may not have a hoarse throat,' George said, 'but she's certainly got a 
sharp tongue. Maybe they'll cure that instead.' Into the saucepan went the five 
hundred gigantic purple pills.
Then there was a bottle of thick yellowish liquid. FOR COWS, BULLS AND BULLOCKS, 
the label said. WILL CURE COW POX, COW MANGE, CRUMPLED HORNS, BAD BREATH IN 
BULLS, EARACHE, TOOTHACHE, HEADACHE, HOOFACHE, TAILACHE AND SORE UDDERS.
'That grumpy old cow in the living-room has every one of those rotten 
illnesses,' George said. 'She'll need it all.' With a slop and a gurgle, the 
yellow liquid splashed into the now nearly full saucepan.
The next bottle contained a brilliant red liquid. SHEEPDIP, it said on the 
label. FOR SHEEP WITH SHEEPROT AND FOR GETTING RID OF TICKS AND FLEAS. MIX ONE 
SPOONFUL IN ONE GALLON OF WATER AND SLOSH IT OVER THE SHEEP. CAUTION, DO NOT 
MAKE THE MIXTURE ANY STRONGER OR THE WOOL WILL FALL OUT AND THE ANIMAL WILL BE 
NAKED.
'By gum,' said George, 'how I'd love to walk in and slosh it all over old 
Grandma and watch the ticks and fleas go jumping off her. But I can't. I 
mustn't. So she'll have to drink it instead.' He poured the bright red medicine 
into the saucepan.
The last bottle on the shelf was full of pale green pills. PIG PILLS, the label 
announced. FOR PIGS WITH PORK PRICKLES, TENDER TROTTERS, BRISTLE BLIGHT AND 
SWINE SICKNESS. GIVE ONE PILL PER DAY. IN SEVERE CASES TWO PILLS MAY BE GIVEN, 
BUT MORE THAN THAT WILL MAKE THE PIG ROCK AND ROLL.
'Just the stuff, said George, 'for that miserable old pig back there in the 
house. She'll need a very big dose.' He tipped all the green pills, hundreds and 
hundreds of them, into the saucepan.
There was an old stick lying on the bench that had been used for stirring paint. 
George picked it up and started to stir his marvellous concoction. The mixture 
was as thick as cream, and as he stirred and stirred, many wonderful colours 
rose up from the depths and blended together, pinks, blues, greens, yellows and 
browns.
George went on stirring until it was all well mixed, but even so there were 
still hundreds of pills lying on the bottom that hadn't melted. And there was 
his mother's splendid powder-puff floating on the surface. 'I shall have to boil 
it all up,' George said. 'One good quick boil on the stove is all it needs.' And 
with that he staggered back towards the house with the enormous heavy saucepan.
On the way, he passed the garage, so he went in to see if he could find any 
other interesting things. He added the following:
Half a pint of ENGINE OIL — to keep Grandma's engine going smoothly.
Some ANTI-FREEZE — to keep her radiator from freezing up in winter.
A handful of GREASE — to grease her creaking joints.
Then back to the kitchen.


The Cook-up


In the kitchen, George put the saucepan on the stove and turned up the gas flame 
underneath it as high as it would go.
'George!' came the awful voice from the next room. 'It's time for my medicine!'
'Not yet, Grandma,' George called back. 'There's still twenty minutes before 
eleven o'clock.'
'What mischief are you up to in there now?' Granny screeched. 'I hear noises.'
George thought it best not to answer this one. He found a long wooden spoon in a 
kitchen drawer and began stirring hard. The stuff in the pot got hotter and 
hotter.
Soon the marvellous mixture began to froth and foam. A rich blue smoke, the 
colour of peacocks, rose from the surface of the liquid, and a fiery fearsome 
smell filled the kitchen. It made George choke and splutter. It was a smell 
unlike any he had smelled before. It was a brutal and bewitching smell, spicy 
and staggering, fierce and frenzied, full of wizardry and magic. Whenever he got 
a whiff of it up his nose, firecrackers went off in his skull and electric 
prickles ran along the backs of his legs. It was wonderful to stand there 
stirring this amazing mixture and to watch it smoking blue and bubbling and 
frothing and foaming as though it were alive. At one point, he could have sworn 
he saw bright sparks flashing in the swirling foam.
And suddenly, George found himself dancing around the steaming pot, chanting 
strange words that came into his head out of nowhere:


'Fiery broth and witch's brew
Foamy froth and riches blue
Fume and spume and spoondrift spray
Fizzle swizzle shout hooray
Watch it sloshing, swashing, sploshing
Hear it hissing, squishing, spissing
Grandma better start to pray.'


Brown Paint


George turned off the heat under the saucepan. He must leave plenty of time for 
it to cool down.
When all the steam and froth had gone away, he peered into the giant pan to see 
what colour the great medicine now was. It was a deep and brilliant blue.
'It needs more brown in it,' George said. 'It simply must be brown or she'll get 
suspicious.'
George ran outside and dashed into his father's toolshed where all the paints 
were kept. There was a row of cans on the shelf, all colours, black, green, red, 
pink, white and brown. He reached for the can of brown. The label said simply 
DARK BROWN GLOSS PAINT ONE QUART. He took a screwdriver and prised off the lid. 
The can was three-quarters full. He rushed it back to the kitchen. He poured the 
whole lot into the saucepan. The saucepan was now full to the brim. Very gently, 
George stirred the paint into the mixture with the long wooden spoon. Ah-ha! It 
was all turning brown! A lovely rich creamy brown!
'Where's that medicine of mine, boy?!' came the voice from the living-room. 
'You're forgetting me! You're doing it on purpose! I shall tell your mother!'
'I'm not forgetting you, Grandma,' George called back. 'I'm thinking of you all 
the time. But there are still ten minutes to go.'
'You're a nasty little maggot!' the voice screeched back. 'You're a lazy and 
disobedient little worm, and you're growing too fast.'
George fetched the bottle of Grandma's real medicine from the sideboard. He took 
out the cork and tipped it all down the sink. He then filled the bottle with his 
own magic mixture by dipping a small jug into the saucepan and using it as a 
pourer. He replaced the cork.
Had it cooled down enough yet? Not quite. He held the bottle under the cold tap 
for a couple of minutes. The label came off in the wet but that didn't matter. 
He dried the bottle with a dishcloth.
All was now ready!
This was it!
The great moment had arrived!
'Medicine time, Grandma!' he called out.
'I should hope so, too,' came the grumpy reply.
The silver tablespoon in which the medicine was always given lay ready on the 
kitchen sideboard. George picked it up.
Holding the spoon in one hand and the bottle in the other, he advanced into the 
living-room.


Grandma Gets the Medicine


Grandma sat hunched in her chair by the window. The wicked little eyes followed 
George closely as he crossed the room towards her.
'You're late,' she snapped.
'I don't think I am, Grandma.'
'Don't interrupt me in the middle of a sentence!' she shouted.
'But you'd finished your sentence, Grandma.'
'There you go again!' she cried. 'Always interrupting and arguing. You really 
are a tiresome little boy. What's the time?'
'It's exactly eleven o'clock, Grandma.'
'You're lying as usual. Stop talking so much and give me my medicine. Shake the 
bottle first. Then pour it into the spoon and make sure it's a whole spoonful.'
'Are you going to gulp it all down in one go?' George asked her. 'Or will you 
sip it?'
'What I do is none of your business,' the old woman said. 'Fill the spoon.'
As George removed the cork and began very slowly to pour the thick brown stuff 
into the spoon, he couldn't help thinking back upon all the mad and marvellous 
things that had gone into the making of this crazy stuff — the shaving soap, the 
hair remover, the dandruff cure, the automatic washing-machine powder, the flea 
powder for dogs, the shoe polish, the black pepper, the horseradish sauce and 
all the rest of them, not to mention the powerful animal pills and powders and 
liquids . . . and the brown paint.
'Open your mouth wide, Grandma,' he said, 'and I'll pop it in.'
The old hag opened her small wrinkled mouth, showing disgusting pale brown 
teeth.
'Here we go!' George cried out. 'Swallow it down!' He pushed the spoon well into 
her mouth and tipped the mixture down her throat. Then he stepped back to watch 
the result.
It was worth watching.
Grandma yelled 'Oweeeee!' and her whole body shot up whoosh into the air. It was 
exactly as though someone had pushed an electric wire through the underneath of 
her chair and switched on the current. Up she went like a jack-in-the-box . . . 
and she didn't come down . . . she stayed there . . . suspended in mid air . . . 
about two feet up . . . still in a sitting position . . . but rigid now . . . 
frozen . . . quivering . . . the eyes bulging . . . the hair standing straight 
up on end.
'Is something wrong, Grandma?' George asked her politely. 'Are you all right?'
Suspended up there in space, the old girl was beyond speaking.
The shock that George's marvellous mixture had given her must have been 
tremendous.
You'd have thought she'd swallowed a red-hot poker the way she took off from 
that chair.
Then down she came again with a plop, back into her seat.
'Call the fire brigade!' she shouted suddenly. 'My stomach's on fire!'
'It's just the medicine, Grandma,' George said. 'It's good strong stuff.'
'Fire!' the old woman yelled. 'Fire in the basement! Get a bucket! Man the 
hoses! Do something quick!'
'Cool it, Grandma,' George said. But he got a bit of a shock when he saw the 
smoke coming out of her mouth and out of her nostrils. Clouds of black smoke 
were coming out of her nose and blowing around the room.
'By golly, you really are on fire,' George said.
'Of course I'm on fire!' she yelled. 'I'll be burned to a crisp! I'll be fried 
to a frizzle! I'll be boiled like a beetroot!'
George ran into the kitchen and came back with a jug of water. 'Open your mouth, 
Grandma!' he cried. He could hardly see her for the smoke, but he managed to 
pour half a jugful down her throat. A sizzling sound, the kind you get if you 
hold a hot frying-pan under a cold tap, came up from deep down in Grandma's 
stomach. The old hag bucked and shied and snorted. She gasped and gurgled. 
Spouts of water came shooting out of her. And the smoke cleared away.
'The fire's out,' George announced proudly. 'You'll be all right now, Grandma.'
'All right?' she yelled. 'Who's all right? There's jacky-jumpers in my tummy! 
There's squigglers in my belly! There's bangers in my bottom!' She began 
bouncing up and down in the chair. Quite obviously she was not very comfortable.
'You'll find it's doing you a lot of good, that medicine, Grandma,' George said.
'Good?' she screamed. 'Doing me good? It's killing me!'
Then she began to bulge.
She was swelling!
She was puffing up all over!
Someone was pumping her up, that's how it looked!
Was she going to explode?
Her face was turning from purple to green!
But wait! She had a puncture somewhere! George could hear the hiss of escaping 
air. She stopped swelling. She was going down. She was slowly getting thinner 
again, shrinking back and back slowly to her shrivelly old self.
'How's things, Grandma?' George said.
No answer.
Then a funny thing happened. Grandma's body gave a sudden sharp twist and a 
sudden sharp jerk and she flipped herself clear out of the chair and landed 
neatly on her two feet on the carpet.
'That's terrific, Grandma!' George cried. 'You haven't stood up like that for 
years! Look at you! You're standing up all on your own and you're not even using 
a stick!'
Grandma didn't even hear him. The frozen pop-eyed look was back with her again 
now. She was miles away in another world.
Marvellous medicine, George told himself. He found it fascinating to stand there 
watching what it was doing to the old hag. What next? he wondered.
He soon found out.
Suddenly she began to grow.
It was quite slow at first . . . just a very gradual inching upwards . . . up, 
up, up . . . inch by inch . . . getting taller and taller . . . about an inch 
every few seconds . . . and in the beginning George didn't notice it.
But when she had passed the five foot six mark and was going on up towards being 
six feet tall, George gave a jump and shouted, 'Hey, Grandma! You're growing! 
You're going up! Hang on, Grandma! You'd better stop now or you'll be hitting 
the ceiling!'
But Grandma didn't stop.
It was a truly fantastic sight, this ancient scrawny old woman getting taller 
and taller, longer and longer, thinner and thinner, as though she were a piece 
of elastic being pulled upwards by invisible hands.
When the top of her head actually touched the ceiling, George thought she was 
bound to stop.
But she didn't.
There was a sort of scrunching noise, and bits of plaster and cement came 
raining down.
'Hadn't you better stop now, Grandma?' George said. 'Daddy's just had this whole 
room repainted.'
But there was no stopping her now.
Soon, her head and shoulders had completely disappeared through the ceiling and 
she was still going.
George dashed upstairs to his own bedroom and there she was coming up through 
the floor like a mushroom.
'Whoopee!' she shouted, finding her voice at last. 'Hallelujah, here I come!'
'Steady on, Grandma,' George said.
'With a heigh-nonny-no and up we go!' she shouted. 'Just watch me grow!'
'This is my room,' George said. 'Look at the mess you're making.'
'Terrific medicine!' she cried. 'Give me some more!'
She's dotty as a doughnut, George thought.
'Come on, boy! Give me some more!' she yelled. 'Dish it out! I'm slowing down!'
George was still clutching the medicine bottle in one hand and the spoon in the 
other. Oh well, he thought, why not? He poured out a second dose and popped it 
into her mouth.
'Oweee!' she screamed and up she went again. Her feet were still on the floor 
downstairs in the living-room but her head was moving quickly towards the 
ceiling of the bedroom.
'I'm on my way now, boy!' she called down to George. 'Just watch me go!'
'That's the attic above you, Grandma!' George called out. 'I'd keep out of 
there! It's full of bugs and bogles!'
Crash! The old girl's head went through the ceiling as though it were butter.
George stood in his bedroom gazing at the shambles. There was a big hole in the 
floor and another in the ceiling, and sticking up like a post between the two 
was the middle part of Grandma. Her legs were in the room below, her head in the 
attic.
'I'm still going!' came the old screechy voice from up above. 'Give me another 
dose, my boy, and let's go through the roof!'
'No, Grandma, no!' George called back. 'You're busting up the whole house!'
'To heck with the house!' she shouted. 'I want some fresh air! I haven't been 
outside for twenty years!'
'By golly, she is going through the roof!' George told himself. He ran 
downstairs. He rushed out of the back door into the yard. It would be simply 
awful, he thought, if she bashed up the roof as well. His father would be 
furious. And he, George, would get the blame. He had made the medicine. He had 
given her too much. 'Don't come through the roof, Grandma,' he prayed. 'Please 
don't.'


The Brown Hen


George stood in the farmyard looking up at the roof. The old farmhouse had a 
fine roof of pale red tiles and tall chimneys.
There was no sign of Grandma. There was only a song-thrush sitting on one of the 
chimney-pots, singing a song. The old wurzel's got stuck in the attic, George 
thought. Thank goodness for that.
Suddenly a tile came clattering down from the roof and fell into the yard. The 
song-thrush took off fast and flew away.
Then another tile came down.
Then half a dozen more.
And then, very slowly, like some weird monster rising up from the deep, 
Grandma's head came through the roof . . .
Then her scrawny neck . . .
And the tops of her shoulders . . .
'How'm I doing, boy!' she shouted. 'How's that for a bash up?'
'Don't you think you'd better stop now, Grandma?' George called out . . .
'I have stopped!' she answered. 'I feel terrific! Didn't I tell you I had magic 
powers! Didn't I warn you I had wizardry in the tips of my fingers! But you 
wouldn't listen to me, would you? You wouldn't listen to your old Grandma!'
'You didn't do it, Grandma,' George shouted back to her. 'I did it! I made you a 
new medicine!'
'A new medicine? You? What rubbish!' she yelled.
'I did! I did!' George shouted.
'You're lying as usual!' Grandma yelled. 'You're always lying!'
'I'm not lying, Grandma. I swear I'm not.'
The wrinkled old face high up on the roof stared down suspiciously at George. 
'Are you telling me you actually made a new medicine all by yourself?' she 
shouted.
'Yes, Grandma, all by myself.'
'I don't believe you,' she answered. 'But I'm very comfortable up here. Fetch me 
a cup of tea.'
A brown hen was pecking about in the yard close to where George was standing. 
The hen gave him an idea. Quickly, he uncorked the medicine bottle and poured 
some of the brown stuff into the spoon. 'Watch this, Grandma!' he shouted. He 
crouched down, holding out the spoon to the hen.
'Chicken,' he said. 'Chick-chick-chicken. Come here. Have some of this.'
Chickens are stupid birds, and very greedy. They think everything is food. This 
one thought the spoon was full of corn. It hopped over. It put its head on one 
side and looked at the spoon. 'Come on, chicken,' George said. 'Good chicken. 
Chick-chick-chick.'
The brown hen stretched out its neck towards the spoon and went peck. It got a 
beakful of medicine.
The effect was electric.
'Oweee!' shrieked the hen and it shot straight up into the air like a rocket. It 
went as high as the house.
Then down it came again into the yard, splosh. And there it sat with its 
feathers all sticking straight out from its body. There was a look of amazement 
on its silly face. George stood watching it. Grandma up on the roof was watching 
it, too.
The hen got to its feet. It was rather shaky. It was making funny gurgling 
noises in its throat. Its beak was opening and shutting. It seemed like a pretty 
sick hen.
'You've done it in, you stupid boy!' Grandma shouted. 'That hen's going to die! 
Your father'll be after you now! He'll give you socks and serve you right!'
All of a sudden, black smoke started pouring out of the hen's beak.
'It's on fire!' Grandma yelled. 'The hen's on fire!'
George ran to the water-trough to get a bucket of water.
'That hen'll be roasted and ready for eating any moment!' Grandma shouted.
George sloshed the bucket of water over the hen. There was a sizzling sound and 
the smoke went away.
'Old hen's laid its last egg!' Grandma shouted. 'Hens don't do any laying after 
they've been on fire!'
Now that the fire was out, the hen seemed better. It stood up properly. It 
flapped its wings. Then it crouched down low to the ground, as though getting 
ready to jump. It did jump. It jumped high in the air and turned a complete 
somersault, then landed back on its feet.
'It's a circus hen!' Grandma shouted from the rooftop. 'It's a flipping 
acrobat!'
Now the hen began to grow.
George had been waiting for this to happen. 'It's growing!' he yelled. 'It's 
growing, Grandma! Look, it's growing!'
Bigger and bigger . . . taller and taller it grew. Soon the hen was four or five 
times its normal size.
'Can you see it, Grandma?!' George shouted.
'I can see it, boy!' the old girl shouted back. 'I'm watching it!'
George was hopping about from one foot to the other with excitement, pointing at 
the enormous hen and shouting, 'It's had the magic medicine, Grandma, and it's 
growing just like you did!'
But there was a difference between the way the hen was growing and the way 
Grandma grew. When Grandma grew taller and taller, she got thinner and thinner. 
The hen didn't. It stayed nice and plump all along.
Soon it was taller than George, but it didn't stop there. It went right on 
growing until it was about as big as a horse. Then it stopped.
'Doesn't it look marvellous, Grandma!' George shouted.
'It's not as tall as me!' Grandma sang out. 'Compared with me, that hen is 
titchy small! I am the tallest of them all!'


The Pig, the Bullocks, the Sheep, the Pony and the Nanny-goat


At that moment, George's mother came back from shopping in the village. She 
drove her car into the yard and got out. She was carrying a bottle of milk in 
one hand and a bag of groceries in the other.
The first thing she saw was the gigantic brown hen towering over little George. 
She dropped the bottle of milk.
Then Grandma started shouting at her from the rooftop, and when she looked up 
and saw Grandma's head sticking up through the tiles, she dropped the bag of 
groceries.
'How about that then, eh Mary?' Grandma shouted. 'I'll bet you've never seen a 
hen as big as that! That's George's giant hen, that is!'
'But . . . but . . . but . . .' stammered George's mother.
'It's George's magic medicine!' Grandma shouted. 'We've both of us had it, the 
hen and I!'
'But how in the world did you get up on the roof?' cried the mother.
'I didn't!' cackled the old woman. 'My feet are still standing on the floor in 
the living-room!'
This was too much for George's mother to understand. She just goggled and gaped. 
She looked as though she was going to faint.
A second later, George's father appeared. His name was Mr Killy Kranky. Mr 
Kranky was a small man with bandy legs and a huge head. He was a kind father to 
George, but he was not an easy person to live with because even the smallest 
things got him all worked up and excited. The hen standing in the yard was 
certainly not a small thing, and when Mr Kranky saw it he started jumping about 
as though something was burning his feet. 'Great heavens!' he cried, waving his 
arms. 'What's this? What's happened? Where did it come from? It's a giant hen! 
Who did it?'
'I did,' George said.
'Look at me!' Grandma shouted from the rooftop. 'Never mind about the hen! What 
about me?'
Mr Kranky looked up and saw Grandma. 'Shut up, Grandma,' he said. It didn't seem 
to surprise him that the old girl was sticking up through the roof. It was the 
hen that excited him. He had never seen anything like it. But then who had?
'It's fantastic!' Mr Kranky shouted, dancing round and round. 'It's colossal! 
It's gigantic! It's tremendous! It's a miracle! How did you do it, George?'
George started telling his father about the magic medicine. While he was doing 
this, the big brown hen sat down in the middle of the yard and went 
cluck-cluck-cluck . . . cluck-cluck-cluck-cluck-cluck.
Everyone stared at it.
When it stood up again, there was a brown egg lying there. The egg was the size 
of a football.
'That egg would make scrambled eggs for twenty people!' Mrs Kranky said.
'George!' Mr Kranky shouted. 'How much of this medicine have you got?'
'Lots,' George said. 'There's a big saucepanful in the kitchen, and this bottle 
here's nearly full.'
'Come with me!' Mr Kranky yelled, grabbing George by the arm. 'Bring the 
medicine! For years and years I've been trying to breed bigger and bigger 
animals. Bigger bulls for beef. Bigger pigs for pork. Bigger sheep for mutton . 
. .'
They went to the pigsty first.
George gave a spoonful of medicine to the pig.
The pig blew smoke from its nose and jumped about all over the place. Then it 
grew and grew.
In the end, it looked like this . . .
They went to the herd of fine black bullocks that Mr Kranky was trying to fatten 
for the market.
George gave each of them some medicine, and this is what happened . . .
Then the sheep . . .
He gave some to his grey pony, Jack Frost . . .
And finally, just for fun, he gave some to Alma, the nanny-goat . . .


A Crane for Grandma


Grandma, from high up on the rooftop, could see everything that was going on and 
she didn't like what she saw. She wanted to be the centre of attention and 
nobody was taking the slightest notice of her. George and Mr Kranky were running 
round and getting excited about the enormous animals. Mrs Kranky was washing up 
in the kitchen, and Grandma was all alone on the rooftop.
'Hey you!' she yelled. 'George! Get me a cup of tea this minute, you idle little 
beast!'
'Don't listen to the old goat,' Mr Kranky said. 'She's stuck where she is and a 
good thing, too.'
'But we can't leave her up there, dad,' George said. 'What if it rains?'
'George!' Grandma yelled. 'Oh, you horrible little boy! You disgusting little 
worm! Fetch me a cup of tea at once and a slice of currant cake!'
'We'll have to get her out, dad,' George said. 'She won't give us any peace if 
we don't.'
Mrs Kranky came outside and she agreed with George. 'She's my own mother,' she 
said.
'She's a pain in the neck,' Mr Kranky said.
'I don't care,' Mrs Kranky said. 'I'm not leaving my own mother sticking up 
through the roof for the rest of her life.'
So in the end, Mr Kranky telephoned the Crane Company and asked them to send 
their biggest crane out to the house at once.
The crane arrived one hour later. It was on wheels and there were two men inside 
it. The crane men climbed up on to the roof and put ropes under Grandma's arms. 
Then she was lifted right up through the roof . . .
In a way, the medicine had done Grandma good. It had not made her any less 
grumpy or bad-tempered, but it seemed to have cured all her aches and pains, and 
she was suddenly as frisky as a ferret. As soon as the crane had lowered her to 
the ground, she ran over to George's huge pony, Jack Frost, and jumped on to his 
back. This ancient old hag, who was now as tall as a house, then galloped about 
the farm on the gigantic pony, jumping over trees and sheds and shouting, 'Out 
of my way! Clear the decks! Stand back all you miserable midgets or I'll trample 
you to death!' and other silly things like that.
But because Grandma was now much too tall to get back into the house, she had to 
sleep that night in the hay-barn with the mice and the rats.


Mr Kranky's Great Idea


The next day, George's father came down to breakfast in a state of greater 
excitement than ever. 'I've been awake all night thinking about it!' he cried.
'About what, dad?' George asked him.
'About your marvellous medicine, of course! We can't stop now, my boy! We must 
start making more of it at once! More and more and more!'
The giant saucepan had been completely emptied the day before because there had 
been so many sheep and pigs and cows and bullocks to be dosed.
'But why do we need more, dad?' George asked. 'We've done all our own animals 
and we've made Grandma feel as frisky as a ferret even though she does have to 
sleep in the barn.'
'My dear boy,' cried Mr Killy Kranky, 'we need barrels and barrels of it! Tons 
and tons! Then we will sell it to every farmer in the world so that all of them 
can have giant animals! We will build a Marvellous Medicine Factory and sell the 
stuff in bottles at five pounds a time. We will become rich and you will become 
famous!'
'But wait a minute, dad,' George said.
'There's no waiting!' cried Mr Kranky, working himself up so much that he put 
butter in his coffee and milk on his toast. 'Don't you understand what this 
tremendous invention of yours is going to do to the world! Nobody will ever go 
hungry again!'
'Why won't they?' asked George.
'Because one giant cow will give fifty buckets of milk a day!' cried Mr Kranky, 
waving his arms. 'One giant chicken will make a hundred fried chicken dinners, 
and one giant pig will give you a thousand pork chops! It's tremendous, my dear 
boy! It's fantastic! It'll change the world.'
'But wait a minute, dad,' George said again.
'Don't keep saying wait a minute!' shouted Mr Kranky. 'There isn't a minute to 
wait! We must get cracking at once!'
'Do calm down, my dear,' Mrs Kranky said from the other end of the table. 'And 
stop putting marmalade on your cornflakes.'
'The heck with my cornflakes!' cried Mr Kranky, leaping up from his chair. 'Come 
on, George! Let's get going! And the first thing we'll do is to make one more 
saucepanful as a tester.'
'But dad,' said little George. 'The trouble is . . .'
'There won't be any trouble, my boy!' cried Mr Kranky. 'How can there possibly 
be any trouble? All you've got to do is put the same stuff into the saucepan as 
you did yesterday. And while you're doing it, I'll write down each and every 
item. That's how we'll get the magic recipe!'
'But dad,' George said. 'Please listen to me.'
'Why don't you listen to him,' Mrs Kranky said. 'The boy's trying to tell you 
something.'
But Mr Kranky was too excited to listen to anyone except himself. 'And then,' he 
cried, 'when the new mixture is ready, we'll test it out on an old hen just to 
make absolutely sure we've got it right, and after that we'll all shout hooray 
and build the giant factory!'
'But dad . . .'
'Come on then, what is it you want to say?'
'I can't possibly remember all the hundreds of things I put into the saucepan to 
make the medicine,' George said.
'Of course you can, my dear boy,' cried Mr Kranky. 'I'll help you! I'll jog your 
memory! You'll get it in the end, you see if you don't! Now then, what was the 
very first thing you put in?'
'I went up to the bathroom first,' George said. 'I used a lot of things in the 
bathroom and on mummy's dressing-table.'
'Come on, then!' cried Mr Killy Kranky. 'Up we go to the bathroom!'
When they got there, they found, of course, a whole lot of empty tubes and empty 
aerosols and empty bottles. 'That's great,' said Mr Kranky. 'That tells us 
exactly what you used. If anything is empty, it means you used it.'
So Mr Kranky started making a list of everything that was empty in the bathroom. 
Then they went to Mrs Kranky's dressing-table. 'A box of powder,' said Mr 
Kranky, writing it down. 'Helga's hairset. Flowers of Turnips perfume. Terrific. 
This is going to be easy. Where did you go next?'
'To the laundry-room,' George said. 'But are you sure you haven't missed 
anything out up here, dad?'
'That's up to you, my boy,' Mr Kranky said. 'Have I?'
'I don't think so,' George said. So down they went to the laundry-room and once 
again Mr Kranky wrote down the names of all the empty bottles and cans. 'My 
goodness me, what a mass of stuff you used!' he cried. 'No wonder it did magic 
things! Is that the lot?'
'No, dad, it's not,' George said, and he led his father out to the shed where 
the animal medicines were kept and showed him the five big empty bottles up on 
the shelf. Mr Kranky wrote down all their names.
'Anything else?' Mr Kranky asked.
Little George scratched his head and thought and thought but he couldn't 
remember having put anything else in.
Mr Killy Kranky leapt into his car and drove down to the village and bought new 
bottles and tubes and cans of everything on his list. He then went to the vet 
and got a fresh supply of all the animal medicines George had used.
'Now show me how you did it, George,' he said. 'Come along. Show me exactly how 
you mixed them all together.'


Marvellous Medicine Number Two


They were in the kitchen now and the big saucepan was on the stove. All the 
things Mr Kranky had bought were lined up near the sink.
'Come along, my boy!' cried Mr Killy Kranky. 'Which one did you put in first?'
'This one,' George said. 'Goldengloss Hair Shampoo.' He emptied the bottle into 
the pan.
'Now the toothpaste,' George went on . . . 'And the shaving soap . . . and the 
face cream . . . and the nail varnish . . .'
'Keep at it, my boy!' cried Mr Kranky, dancing round the kitchen. 'Keep putting 
them in! Don't stop! Don't pause! Don't hesitate! It's a pleasure, my dear 
fellow, to watch you work!'
One by one, George poured and squeezed the things into the saucepan. With 
everything so close at hand, the whole job didn't take him more than ten 
minutes. But when it was all done, the saucepan didn't somehow seem to be quite 
as full as it had been the first time.
'Now what did you do?' cried Mr Kranky. 'Did you stir it?'
'I boiled it,' George said. 'But not for long. And I stirred it as well.'
So Mr Kranky lit the gas under the saucepan and George stirred the mixture with 
the same long wooden spoon he had used before. 'It's not brown enough,' George 
said. 'Wait a minute! I know what I've forgotten!'
'What?' cried Mr Kranky. 'Tell me, quick! Because if we've forgotten even one 
tiny thing, then it won't work! At least not in the same way.'
'A quart of brown gloss paint,' George said. 'That's what I've forgotten.'
Mr Killy Kranky shot out of the house and into his car like a rocket. He sped 
down to the village and bought the paint and rushed back again. He opened the 
can in the kitchen and handed it to George. George poured the paint into the 
saucepan.
'Ah-ha, that's better,' George said. 'That's more like the right colour.'
'It's boiling!' cried Mr Kranky. 'It's boiling and bubbling, George! Is it ready 
yet?'
'It's ready,' George said. 'At least I hope it is.'
'Right!' shouted Mr Kranky, hopping about. 'Let's test it! Let's give some to a 
chicken!'
'My heavens alive, why don't you calm down a bit?' Mrs Kranky said, coming into 
the kitchen.
'Calm down?' cried Mr Kranky. 'You expect me to calm down and here we are mixing 
up the greatest medicine ever discovered in the history of the world! Come 
along, George! Dip a cupful out of the saucepan and get a spoon and we'll give 
some to a chicken just to make absolutely certain we've got the correct 
mixture.'
Outside in the yard, there were several chickens that hadn't had any of George's 
Marvellous Medicine Number One. They were pecking about in the dirt in that 
silly way chickens do.
George crouched down, holding out a spoonful of Marvellous Medicine Number Two. 
'Come on, chicken,' he said. 'Good chicken. Chick-chick-chick.'
A white chicken with black specks on its feathers looked up at George. It walked 
over to the spoon and went peck.
The effect that Medicine Number Two had on this chicken was not quite the same 
as the effect produced by Medicine Number One, but it was very interesting. 
'Whooosh!' shrieked the chicken and it shot six feet up in the air and came down 
again. Then sparks came flying out of its beak, bright yellow sparks of fire, as 
though someone was sharpening a knife on a grindstone inside its tummy. Then its 
legs began to grow longer. Its body stayed the same size but the two thin yellow 
legs got longer and longer and longer . . . and longer still . . .
'What's happening to it?' cried Mr Killy Kranky.
'Something's wrong,' George said.
The legs went on growing and the more they grew, the higher up into the air went 
the chicken's body. When the legs were about fifteen feet long, they stopped 
growing. The chicken looked perfectly absurd with its long long legs and its 
ordinary little body perched high up on top. It was like a chicken on stilts.
'Oh my sainted aunts!' cried Mr Killy Kranky. 'We've got it wrong! This 
chicken's no good to anybody! It's all legs! No one wants chickens' legs!'
'I must have left something out,' George said.
'I know you left something out!' cried Mr Kranky. 'Think, boy, think! What was 
it you left out?'
'I've got it!' said George.
'What was it, quick?'
'Flea powder for dogs,' George said.
'You mean you put flea powder in the first one?'
'Yes, dad, I did. A whole carton of it.'
'Then that's the answer!'
'Wait a minute,' said George. 'Did we have brown shoe polish on our list?'
'We did not,' said Mr Kranky.
'I used that, too,' said George.
'Well, no wonder it went wrong,' said Mr Kranky. He was already running to his 
car, and soon he was heading down the village to buy more flea powder and more 
shoe polish.


Marvellous Medicine Number Three


'Here it is!' cried Mr Killy Kranky, rushing into the kitchen. 'One carton of 
flea powder for dogs and one tin of brown shoe-polish!'
George poured the flea powder into the giant saucepan. Then he scooped the 
shoe-polish out of its tin and added that as well.
'Stir it up, George!' shouted Mr Kranky. 'Give it another boil! We've got it 
this time! I'll bet we've got it!'
After Marvellous Medicine Number Three had been boiled and stirred, George took 
a cupful of it out into the yard to try it on another chicken. Mr Kranky ran 
after him, flapping his arms and hopping with excitement. 'Come and watch this 
one!' he called out to Mrs Kranky. 'Come and watch us turning an ordinary 
chicken into a lovely great big one that lays eggs as large as footballs!'
'I hope you do better than last time,' said Mrs Kranky, following them out.
'Come on, chicken,' said George, holding out a spoonful of Medicine Number 
Three. 'Good chicken. Chick-chick-chick-chick-chick. Have some of this lovely 
medicine.'
A magnificent black cockerel with a scarlet comb came stepping over. The 
cockerel looked at the spoon and it went peck.
'Cock-a-doodle-do!' squawked the cockerel, shooting up into the air and coming 
down again.
'Watch him now!' cried Mr Kranky. 'Watch him grow! Any moment he's going to 
start getting bigger and bigger!'
Mr Killy Kranky, Mrs Kranky and little George stood in the yard staring at the 
black cockerel. The cockerel stood quite still. It looked as though it had a 
headache.
'What's happening to its neck?' Mrs Kranky said.
'It's getting longer,' George said.
'I'll say it's getting longer,' Mrs Kranky said.
Mr Kranky, for once, said nothing.
'Last time it was the legs,' Mrs Kranky said. 'Now it's the neck. Who wants a 
chicken with a long neck? You can't eat a chicken's neck.'
It was an extraordinary sight. The cockerel's body hadn't grown at all. But the 
neck was now about six feet long.
'All right, George,' Mr Kranky said. 'What else have you forgotten?'
'I don't know,' George said.
'Oh yes you do,' Mr Kranky said. 'Come along, boy, think. There's probably just 
one vital thing missing and you've got to remember it.'
'I put in some engine oil from the garage,' George said. 'Did you have that on 
your list?'
'Eureka!' cried Mr Kranky. 'That's the answer! How much did you put in?'
'Half a pint,' George said.
Mr Kranky ran to the garage and found another half pint of oil. 'And some 
anti-freeze,' George called after him. 'I sloshed in a bit of anti-freeze.'


Marvellous Medicine Number Four


Back in the kitchen once again, George, with Mr Kranky watching him anxiously, 
tipped half a pint of engine oil and some anti-freeze into the giant saucepan.
'Boil it up again!' cried Mr Kranky. 'Boil it and stir it!'
George boiled it and stirred it.
'You'll never get it right,' said Mrs Kranky. 'Don't forget you don't just have 
to have the same things but you've got to have exactly the same amounts of those 
things. And how can you possibly do that?'
'You keep out of this!' cried Mr Kranky. 'We're doing fine! We've got it this 
time, you see if we haven't!'
This was George's Marvellous Medicine Number Four, and when it had boiled for a 
couple of minutes, George once again carried a cupful of it out into the yard. 
Mr Kranky ran after him. Mrs Kranky followed more slowly. 'You're going to have 
some mighty queer chickens around here if you go on like this,' she said.
'Dish it out, George!' cried Mr Kranky. 'Give a spoonful to that one over 
there!' He pointed to a brown hen.
George knelt down and held out the spoon with the new medicine in it. 
'Chick-chick,' he said. 'Try some of this.'
The brown hen walked over and looked at the spoon. Then it went peck.
'Owch!' it said. Then a funny whistling noise came out of its beak.
'Watch it grow!' shouted Mr Kranky.
'Don't be too sure,' said Mrs Kranky. 'Why is it whistling like that?'
'Keep quiet, woman!' cried Mr Kranky. 'Give it a chance!'
They stood there staring at the brown hen.
'It's getting smaller,' George said. 'Look at it, dad. It's shrinking.'
And indeed it was. In less than a minute, the hen had shrunk so much it was no 
bigger than a new-hatched chick. It looked ridiculous.


Goodbye Grandma


'There's still something you've left out,' Mr Kranky said.
'I can't think what it could be,' George said.
'Give it up,' Mrs Kranky said. 'Pack it in. You'll never get it right.'
Mr Kranky looked very forlorn.
George looked pretty fed up, too. He was still kneeling on the ground with the 
spoon in one hand and the cup full of medicine in the other. The ridiculous tiny 
brown hen was walking slowly away.
At that point, Grandma came striding into the yard. From her enormous height, 
she glared down at the three people below her and she shouted, 'What's going on 
around here? Why hasn't anyone brought me my morning cup of tea? It's bad enough 
having to sleep in the yard with the rats and mice but I'll be blowed if I'm 
going to starve as well! No tea! No eggs and bacon! No buttered toast!'
'I'm sorry, mother,' Mrs Kranky said. 'We've been terribly busy. I'll get you 
something right away.'
'Let George get it, the lazy little brute!' Grandma shouted.
Just then, the old woman spotted the cup in George's hand. She bent down and 
peered into it. She saw that it was full of brown liquid. It looked very much 
like tea. 'Ho-ho!' she cried. 'Ha-ha! So that's your little game, is it! You 
look after yourself all right, don't you! You make quite sure you've got a nice 
cup of morning tea! But you didn't think to bring one to your poor old Grandma! 
I always knew you were a selfish pig!'
'No, Grandma,' George said. 'This isn't . . .'
'Don't lie to me, boy!' the enormous old hag shouted. 'Pass it up here this 
minute!'
'No!' cried Mrs Kranky. 'No, mother, don't! That's not for you!'
'Now you're against me, too!' shouted Grandma. 'My own daughter trying to stop 
me having my breakfast! Trying to starve me out!'
Mr Kranky looked up at the horrid old woman and he smiled sweetly. 'Of course 
it's for you, Grandma,' he said. 'You take it and drink it while it's nice and 
hot.'
'Don't think I won't,' Grandma said, bending down from her great height and 
reaching out a huge horny hand for the cup. 'Hand it over, George.'
'No, no, Grandma!' George cried out, pulling the cup away. 'You mustn't! You're 
not to have it!'
'Give it to me, boy!' yelled Grandma.
'Don't!' cried Mrs Kranky. 'That's George's Marvellous . . .'
'Everything's George's round here!' shouted Grandma. 'George's this, George's 
that! I'm fed up with it!' She snatched the cup out of little George's hand and 
carried it high up out of reach.
'Drink it up, Grandma,' Mr Kranky said, grinning hugely. 'Lovely tea.'
'No!' the other two cried. 'No, no, no!'
But it was too late. The ancient beanpole had already put the cup to her lips, 
and in one gulp she swallowed everything that was in it.
'Mother!' wailed Mrs Kranky. 'You've just drunk fifty doses of George's 
Marvellous Medicine Number Four and look what one tiny spoonful did to that 
little old brown hen!'
But Grandma didn't even hear her. Great clouds of steam were already pouring out 
of her mouth and she was beginning to whistle.
'This is going to be interesting,' Mr Kranky said, still grinning.
'Now you've done it!' cried Mrs Kranky, glaring at her husband. 'You've cooked 
the old girl's goose!'
'I didn't do anything,' Mr Kranky said.
'Oh, yes you did! You told her to drink it!'
A tremendous hissing sound was coming from above their heads. Steam was shooting 
out of Grandma's mouth and nose and ears and whistling as it came.
'She'll feel better after she's let off a bit of steam,' Mr Kranky said.
'She's going to blow up!' Mrs Kranky wailed. 'Her boiler's going to burst!'
'Stand clear,' Mr Kranky said.
George was quite alarmed. He stood up and ran back a few paces. The jets of 
white steam kept squirting out of the skinny old hag's head, and the whistling 
was so high and shrill it hurt the ears.
'Call the fire-brigade!' cried Mrs Kranky. 'Call the police! Man the 
hose-pipes!'
'Too late,' said Mr Kranky, looking pleased.
'Grandma!' shrieked Mrs Kranky. 'Mother! Run to the drinking-trough and put your 
head under the water!'
But even as she spoke, the whistling suddenly stopped and the steam disappeared. 
That was when Grandma began to get smaller. She had started off with her head as 
high as the roof of the house, but now she was coming down fast.
'Watch this, George!' Mr Kranky shouted, hopping around the yard and flapping 
his arms. 'Watch what happens when someone's had fifty spoonfuls instead of 
one!'
Very soon, Grandma was back to normal height.
'Stop!' cried Mrs Kranky. 'That's just right.'
But she didn't stop. Smaller and smaller she got . . . down and down she went. 
In another half minute she was no bigger than a bottle of lemonade.
'How d'you feel, mother?' asked Mrs Kranky anxiously.
Grandma's tiny face still bore the same foul and furious expression it had 
always had. Her eyes, no bigger now than little keyholes, were blazing with 
anger. 'How do I feel?' she yelled. 'How d'you think I feel? How would you feel 
if you'd been a glorious giant a minute ago and suddenly you're a miserable 
midget?'
'She's still going!' shouted Mr Kranky gleefully. 'She's still getting smaller!'
And by golly, she was.
When she was no bigger than a cigarette, Mrs Kranky made a grab for her. She 
held her in her hands and she cried, 'How do I stop her getting smaller still?'
'You can't,' said Mr Kranky. 'She's had fifty times the right amount.'
'I must stop her!' Mrs Kranky wailed. 'I can hardly see her as it is!'
'Catch hold of each end and pull,' Mr Kranky said.
By then, Grandma was the size of a match-stick and still shrinking fast.
A moment later, she was no bigger than a pin . . .
Then a pumpkin seed . . .
Then . . .
Then . . .
'Where is she?' cried Mrs Kranky. 'I've lost her!'
'Hooray,' said Mr Kranky.
'She's gone! She's disappeared completely!' cried Mrs Kranky.
'That's what happens to you if you're grumpy and bad-tempered,' said Mr Kranky. 
'Great medicine of yours, George.'
George didn't know what to think.
For a few minutes, Mrs Kranky kept wandering round with a puzzled look on her 
face, saying, 'Mother, where are you? Where've you gone? Where've you got to? 
How can I find you?' But she calmed down quite quickly. And by lunchtime, she 
was saying, 'Ah well, I suppose it's all for the best, really. She was a bit of 
a nuisance around the house, wasn't she?'
'Yes,' Mr Kranky said. 'She most certainly was.'
George didn't say a word. He felt quite trembly. He knew something tremendous 
had taken place that morning. For a few brief moments he had touched with the 
very tips of his fingers the edge of a magic world.




Roald Dahl was born in 1916 in Wales of Norwegian parents. He was educated in 
England before starting work for the Shell Oil Company in Africa. He began 
writing after a 'monumental bash on the head' sustained as an RAF fighter pilot 
during the Second World War. Roald Dahl is one of the most successful and 
well-known of all children's writers. His books, which are read by children the 
world over, include James and the Giant Peach, Charlie and the Chocolate 
Factory, The Magic Finger, Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator, Fantastic Mr 
Fox, Matilda, The Twits, The BFG and The Witches, winner of the 1983 Whitbread 
Award. Roald Dahl died in 1990 at the age of seventy-four.
