

VOLUME II.

COSETTE


BOOK FIRST.--WATERLOO


CHAPTER I

WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES


Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the person
who is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directing
his course towards La Hulpe.  He was on foot.  He was pursuing
a broad paved road, which undulated between two rows of trees,
over the hills which succeed each other, raise the road and let it
fall again, and produce something in the nature of enormous waves.

He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west he
perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud, which has
the form of a reversed vase.  He had just left behind a wood upon
an eminence; and at the angle of the cross-road, by the side
of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient
Barrier No. 4, a public house, bearing on its front this sign: 
At the Four Winds (Aux Quatre Vents). Echabeau, Private Cafe.

A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of a
little valley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch
made through the embankment of the road.  The clump of sparsely
planted but very green trees, which fills the valley on one side of
the road, is dispersed over the meadows on the other, and disappears
gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud.

On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four-wheeled cart
at the door, a large bundle of hop-poles, a plough, a heap of dried
brushwood near a flourishing hedge, lime smoking in a square hole,
and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions. 
A young girl was weeding in a field, where a huge yellow poster,
probably of some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival,
was fluttering in the wind.  At one corner of the inn, beside a pool
in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plunged
into the bushes.  The wayfarer struck into this.

After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of the
fifteenth century, surmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks set
in contrast, he found himself before a large door of arched stone,
with a rectilinear impost, in the sombre style of Louis XIV., flanked
by two flat medallions.  A severe facade rose above this door;
a wall, perpendicular to the facade, almost touched the door,
and flanked it with an abrupt right angle.  In the meadow
before the door lay three harrows, through which, in disorder,
grew all the flowers of May.  The door was closed.  The two decrepit
leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker.

The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May,
which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. 
A brave little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distracted
manner in a large tree.

The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation,
resembling the hollow of a sphere, in the stone on the left,
at the foot of the pier of the door.

At this moment the leaves of the door parted, and a peasant
woman emerged.

She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.

"It was a French cannon-ball which made that," she said to him. 
And she added:--

"That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail,
is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg.  The bullet did
not pierce the wood."

"What is the name of this place?" inquired the wayfarer.

"Hougomont," said the peasant woman.

The traveller straightened himself up.  He walked on a few paces,
and went off to look over the tops of the hedges.  On the horizon
through the trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation,
and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled
a lion.

He was on the battle-field of Waterloo.



CHAPTER II

HOUGOMONT


Hougomont,--this was a funereal spot, the beginning of the obstacle,
the first resistance, which that great wood-cutter of Europe,
called Napoleon, encountered at Waterloo, the first knot under the
blows of his axe.

It was a chateau; it is no longer anything but a farm.  For the antiquary,
Hougomont is Hugomons.  This manor was built by Hugo, Sire of Somerel,
the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers.

The traveller pushed open the door, elbowed an ancient calash
under the porch, and entered the courtyard.

The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the
sixteenth century, which here simulates an arcade, everything else
having fallen prostrate around it.  A monumental aspect often has its
birth in ruin.  In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door,
of the time of Henry IV., permitting a glimpse of the trees
of an orchard; beside this door, a manure-hole, some pickaxes,
some shovels, some carts, an old well, with its flagstone and its
iron reel, a chicken jumping, and a turkey spreading its tail,
a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower, a blossoming pear-tree
trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel--behold the court,
the conquest of which was one of Napoleon's dreams.  This corner
of earth, could he but have seized it, would, perhaps, have given
him the world likewise.  Chickens are scattering its dust abroad
with their beaks.  A growl is audible; it is a huge dog, who shows
his teeth and replaces the English.

The English behaved admirably there.  Cooke's four companies
of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army.

Hougomont viewed on the map, as a geometrical plan, comprising
buildings and enclosures, presents a sort of irregular rectangle,
one angle of which is nicked out.  It is this angle which contains
the southern door, guarded by this wall, which commands it only
a gun's length away.  Hougomont has two doors,--the southern door,
that of the chateau; and the northern door, belonging to the farm. 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont; the divisions
of Foy, Guilleminot, and Bachelu hurled themselves against it;
nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it, and miscarried;
Kellermann's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall. 
Bauduin's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north,
and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning
of a breach on the south, but without taking it.

The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south.  A bit of the
north door, broken by the French, hangs suspended to the wall. 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams, on which the
scars of the attack are visible.

The northern door, which was beaten in by the French, and which has
had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall,
stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock; it is cut squarely
in the wall, built of stone below, of brick above which closes in the
courtyard on the north.  It is a simple door for carts, such as exist
in all farms, with the two large leaves made of rustic planks: 
beyond lie the meadows.  The dispute over this entrance was furious. 
For a long time, all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible
on the door-posts. It was there that Bauduin was killed.

The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard; its horror
is visible there; the confusion of the fray was petrified there;
it lives and it dies there; it was only yesterday.  The walls
are in the death agony, the stones fall; the breaches cry aloud;
the holes are wounds; the drooping, quivering trees seem to be making
an effort to flee.

This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day. Buildings
which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles.

The English barricaded themselves there; the French made their way in,
but could not stand their ground.  Beside the chapel, one wing of
the chateau, the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont,
rises in a crumbling state,--disembowelled, one might say. 
The chateau served for a dungeon, the chapel for a block-house.
There men exterminated each other.  The French, fired on from
every point,--from behind the walls, from the summits of the garrets,
from the depths of the cellars, through all the casements,
through all the air-holes, through every crack in the stones,--
fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men; the reply to the
grape-shot was a conflagration.

In the ruined wing, through windows garnished with bars of iron,
the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible;
the English guards were in ambush in these rooms; the spiral
of the staircase, cracked from the ground floor to the very roof,
appears like the inside of a broken shell.  The staircase has two stories;
the English, besieged on the staircase, and massed on its upper steps,
had cut off the lower steps.  These consisted of large slabs
of blue stone, which form a heap among the nettles.  Half a score
of steps still cling to the wall; on the first is cut the figure
of a trident.  These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches. 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth. 
There are two old trees there:  one is dead; the other is wounded
at its base, and is clothed with verdure in April.  Since 1815 it has
taken to growing through the staircase.

A massacre took place in the chapel.  The interior, which has
recovered its calm, is singular.  The mass has not been said there
since the carnage.  Nevertheless, the altar has been left there--
an altar of unpolished wood, placed against a background of
roughhewn stone.  Four whitewashed walls, a door opposite the altar,
two small arched windows; over the door a large wooden crucifix,
below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay;
on the ground, in one corner, an old window-frame with the glass
all broken to pieces--such is the chapel.  Near the altar there is
nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne, of the fifteenth century;
the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball. 
The French, who were masters of the chapel for a moment, and were
then dislodged, set fire to it.  The flames filled this building;
it was a perfect furnace; the door was burned, the floor was burned,
the wooden Christ was not burned.  The fire preyed upon his feet,
of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen; then it stopped,--
a miracle, according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood. 
The infant Jesus, decapitated, was less fortunate than the Christ.

The walls are covered with inscriptions.  Near the feet of Christ
this name is to be read:  Henquinez.  Then these others: 
Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro (Habana). There
are French names with exclamation points,--a sign of wrath. 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849.  The nations insulted
each other there.

It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up
which held an axe in its hand; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros.

On emerging from the chapel, a well is visible on the left. 
There are two in this courtyard.  One inquires, Why is there no bucket
and pulley to this?  It is because water is no longer drawn there. 
Why is water not drawn there?  Because it is full of skeletons.

The last person who drew water from the well was named
Guillaume van Kylsom.  He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont,
and was gardener there.  On the 18th of June, 1815, his family
fled and concealed themselves in the woods.

The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate
people who had been scattered abroad, for many days and nights. 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable, such as old
boles of burned trees, which mark the site of these poor bivouacs
trembling in the depths of the thickets.

Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont, "to guard the chateau,"
and concealed himself in the cellar.  The English discovered
him there.  They tore him from his hiding-place, and the combatants
forced this frightened man to serve them, by administering blows
with the flats of their swords.  They were thirsty; this Guillaume
brought them water.  It was from this well that he drew it. 
Many drank there their last draught.  This well where drank so many
of the dead was destined to die itself.

After the engagement, they were in haste to bury the dead bodies. 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory, and she causes the pest
to follow glory.  The typhus is a concomitant of triumph. 
This well was deep, and it was turned into a sepulchre.  Three hundred
dead bodies were cast into it.  With too much haste perhaps. 
Were they all dead?  Legend says they were not.  It seems that on
the night succeeding the interment, feeble voices were heard calling
from the well.

This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard.  Three walls,
part stone, part brick, and simulating a small, square tower,
and folded like the leaves of a screen, surround it on all sides. 
The fourth side is open.  It is there that the water was drawn. 
The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless loophole,
possibly the hole made by a shell.  This little tower had a platform,
of which only the beams remain.  The iron supports of the well on
the right form a cross.  On leaning over, the eye is lost in a deep
cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up mass of shadows. 
The base of the walls all about the well is concealed in a growth
of nettles.

This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms
the table for all wells in Belgium.  The slab has here been
replaced by a cross-beam, against which lean five or six shapeless
fragments of knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones. 
There is no longer either pail, chain, or pulley; but there is
still the stone basin which served the overflow.  The rain-water
collects there, and from time to time a bird of the neighboring
forests comes thither to drink, and then flies away.  One house
in this ruin, the farmhouse, is still inhabited.  The door of this
house opens on the courtyard.  Upon this door, beside a pretty Gothic
lock-plate, there is an iron handle with trefoils placed slanting. 
At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant, Wilda, grasped this
handle in order to take refuge in the farm, a French sapper hewed
off his hand with an axe.

The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume
van Kylsom, the old gardener, dead long since.  A woman with gray
hair said to us:  "I was there.  I was three years old.  My sister,
who was older, was terrified and wept.  They carried us off to
the woods.  I went there in my mother's arms.  We glued our ears
to the earth to hear.  I imitated the cannon, and went boum! boum!"

A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard,
so we were told.  The orchard is terrible.

It is in three parts; one might almost say, in three acts. 
The first part is a garden, the second is an orchard, the third
is a wood.  These three parts have a common enclosure:  on the
side of the entrance, the buildings of the chateau and the farm;
on the left, a hedge; on the right, a wall; and at the end, a wall. 
The wall on the right is of brick, the wall at the bottom is of stone. 
One enters the garden first.  It slopes downwards, is planted
with gooseberry bushes, choked with a wild growth of vegetation,
and terminated by a monumental terrace of cut stone, with balustrade
with a double curve.

It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which
preceded Le Notre; to-day it is ruins and briars.  The pilasters
are surmounted by globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone. 
Forty-three balusters can still be counted on their sockets; the rest
lie prostrate in the grass.  Almost all bear scratches of bullets. 
One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured leg.

It was in this garden, further down than the orchard, that six
light-infantry men of the 1st, having made their way thither,
and being unable to escape, hunted down and caught like bears
in their dens, accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies,
one of which was armed with carbines.  The Hanoverians lined
this balustrade and fired from above.  The infantry men,
replying from below, six against two hundred, intrepid and with
no shelter save the currant-bushes, took a quarter of an hour to die.

One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard,
properly speaking.  There, within the limits of those few
square fathoms, fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour. 
The wall seems ready to renew the combat.  Thirty-eight loopholes,
pierced by the English at irregular heights, are there still. 
In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite. 
There are loopholes only in the south wall, as the principal attack came
from that quarter.  The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge;
the French came up, thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge,
crossed it, and found the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade,
with the English guards behind it, the thirty-eight loopholes firing
at once a shower of grape-shot and balls, and Soye's brigade was broken
against it.  Thus Waterloo began.

Nevertheless, the orchard was taken.  As they had no ladders,
the French scaled it with their nails.  They fought hand to hand
amid the trees.  All this grass has been soaked in blood. 
A battalion of Nassau, seven hundred strong, was overwhelmed there. 
The outside of the wall, against which Kellermann's two batteries
were trained, is gnawed by grape-shot.

This orchard is sentient, like others, in the month of May. 
It has its buttercups and its daisies; the grass is tall there;
the cart-horses browse there; cords of hair, on which linen
is drying, traverse the spaces between the trees and force the
passer-by to bend his head; one walks over this uncultivated land,
and one's foot dives into mole-holes. In the middle of the grass
one observes an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant. 
Major Blackmann leaned against it to die.  Beneath a great tree
in the neighborhood fell the German general, Duplat, descended from
a French family which fled on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. 
An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over to one side,
its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam. 
Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age.  There is not one
which has not had its bullet or its biscayan.[6] The skeletons of dead
trees abound in this orchard.  Crows fly through their branches,
and at the end of it is a wood full of violets.


[6] A bullet as large as an egg.


Bauduin, killed, Foy wounded, conflagration, massacre, carnage,
a rivulet formed of English blood, French blood, German blood
mingled in fury, a well crammed with corpses, the regiment of
Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick destroyed, Duplat killed,
Blackmann killed, the English Guards mutilated, twenty French battalions,
besides the forty from Reille's corps, decimated, three thousand
men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down, slashed to pieces,
shot, burned, with their throats cut,--and all this so that a peasant
can say to-day to the traveller:  Monsieur, give me three francs,
and if you like, I will explain to you the affair of Waterloo!



CHAPTER III

THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE, 1815


Let us turn back,--that is one of the story-teller's rights,--
and put ourselves once more in the year 1815, and even a little
earlier than the epoch when the action narrated in the first part
of this book took place.

If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th
of June, 1815, the fate of Europe would have been different. 
A few drops of water, more or less, decided the downfall of Napoleon. 
All that Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end
of Austerlitz was a little more rain, and a cloud traversing the sky
out of season sufficed to make a world crumble.

The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven
o'clock, and that gave Blucher time to come up.  Why?  Because the
ground was wet.  The artillery had to wait until it became a little
firmer before they could manoeuvre.

Napoleon was an artillery officer, and felt the effects of this. 
The foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who, in the report
to the Directory on Aboukir, said:  Such a one of our balls killed
six men.  All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles. 
The key to his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point. 
He treated the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel,
and made a breach in it.  He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot;
he joined and dissolved battles with cannon.  There was something
of the sharpshooter in his genius.  To beat in squares, to pulverize
regiments, to break lines, to crush and disperse masses,--for him
everything lay in this, to strike, strike, strike incessantly,--
and he intrusted this task to the cannon-ball. A redoubtable method,
and one which, united with genius, rendered this gloomy athlete
of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of fifteen years.

On the 18th of June, 1815, he relied all the more on his artillery,
because he had numbers on his side.  Wellington had only one hundred
and fifty-nine mouths of fire; Napoleon had two hundred and forty.

Suppose the soil dry, and the artillery capable of moving,
the action would have begun at six o'clock in the morning. 
The battle would have been won and ended at two o'clock, three
hours before the change of fortune in favor of the Prussians. 
What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this battle? 
Is the shipwreck due to the pilot?

Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated
this epoch by an inward diminution of force?  Had the twenty years
of war worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard, the soul
as well as the body?  Did the veteran make himself disastrously
felt in the leader?  In a word, was this genius, as many historians
of note have thought, suffering from an eclipse?  Did he go into
a frenzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself? 
Did he begin to waver under the delusion of a breath of adventure? 
Had he become--a grave matter in a general--unconscious of peril? 
Is there an age, in this class of material great men, who may be
called the giants of action, when genius grows short-sighted? Old
age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal; for the Dantes and
Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness; is it to grow
less for the Hannibals and the Bonapartes?  Had Napoleon lost the
direct sense of victory?  Had he reached the point where he could
no longer recognize the reef, could no longer divine the snare,
no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses?  Had he lost
his power of scenting out catastrophes?  He who had in former days
known all the roads to triumph, and who, from the summit of his
chariot of lightning, pointed them out with a sovereign finger,
had he now reached that state of sinister amazement when he could
lead his tumultuous legions harnessed to it, to the precipice? 
Was he seized at the age of forty-six with a supreme madness? 
Was that titanic charioteer of destiny no longer anything more than
an immense dare-devil?

We do not think so.

His plan of battle was, by the confession of all, a masterpiece. 
To go straight to the centre of the Allies' line, to make a breach
in the enemy, to cut them in two, to drive the British half back on Hal,
and the Prussian half on Tongres, to make two shattered fragments
of Wellington and Blucher, to carry Mont-Saint-Jean, to seize Brussels,
to hurl the German into the Rhine, and the Englishman into the sea. 
All this was contained in that battle, according to Napoleon. 
Afterwards people would see.

Of course, we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle
of Waterloo; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which
we are relating is connected with this battle, but this history
is not our subject; this history, moreover, has been finished,
and finished in a masterly manner, from one point of view by Napoleon,
and from another point of view by a whole pleiad of historians.[7]


[7] Walter Scott, Lamartine, Vaulabelle, Charras, Quinet, Thiers.


As for us, we leave the historians at loggerheads; we are but a
distant witness, a passer-by on the plain, a seeker bending over
that soil all made of human flesh, taking appearances for realities,
perchance; we have no right to oppose, in the name of science,
a collection of facts which contain illusions, no doubt; we possess
neither military practice nor strategic ability which authorize
a system; in our opinion, a chain of accidents dominated the two
leaders at Waterloo; and when it becomes a question of destiny,
that mysterious culprit, we judge like that ingenious judge,
the populace.



CHAPTER IV

A


Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo
have only to place, mentally, on the ground, a capital A. The left limb
of the A is the road to Nivelles, the right limb is the road to Genappe,
the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l'Alleud. The
top of the A is Mont-Saint-Jean, where Wellington is; the lower left
tip is Hougomont, where Reille is stationed with Jerome Bonaparte;
the right tip is the Belle-Alliance, where Napoleon was.  At the
centre of this chord is the precise point where the final word of the
battle was pronounced.  It was there that the lion has been placed,
the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard.

The triangle included in the top of the A, between the two limbs
and the tie, is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. The dispute over
this plateau constituted the whole battle.  The wings of the two
armies extended to the right and left of the two roads to Genappe
and Nivelles; d'Erlon facing Picton, Reille facing Hill.

Behind the tip of the A, behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean,
is the forest of Soignes.

As for the plain itself, let the reader picture to himself a vast
undulating sweep of ground; each rise commands the next rise,
and all the undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean, and there
end in the forest.

Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers.  It is
a question of seizing the opponent round the waist.  The one seeks
to trip up the other.  They clutch at everything:  a bush is a point
of support; an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder;
for the lack of a hovel under whose cover they can draw up,
a regiment yields its ground; an unevenness in the ground, a chance
turn in the landscape, a cross-path encountered at the right moment,
a grove, a ravine, can stay the heel of that colossus which is
called an army, and prevent its retreat.  He who quits the field
is beaten; hence the necessity devolving on the responsible leader,
of examining the most insignificant clump of trees, and of studying
deeply the slightest relief in the ground.

The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean,
now called the plain of Waterloo.  In the preceding year, Wellington,
with the sagacity of foresight, had examined it as the possible seat
of a great battle.  Upon this spot, and for this duel, on the 18th
of June, Wellington had the good post, Napoleon the bad post. 
The English army was stationed above, the French army below.

It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon
on horseback, glass in hand, upon the heights of Rossomme,
at daybreak, on June 18, 1815.  All the world has seen him before we
can show him.  That calm profile under the little three-cornered
hat of the school of Brienne, that green uniform, the white revers
concealing the star of the Legion of Honor, his great coat hiding
his epaulets, the corner of red ribbon peeping from beneath his vest,
his leather trousers, the white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple
velvet bearing on the corners crowned N's and eagles, Hessian boots
over silk stockings, silver spurs, the sword of Marengo,--that whole
figure of the last of the Caesars is present to all imaginations,
saluted with acclamations by some, severely regarded by others.

That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light; this arose
from a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes,
and which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time;
but to-day history and daylight have arrived.

That light called history is pitiless; it possesses this peculiar and
divine quality, that, pure light as it is, and precisely because it is
wholly light, it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto
beheld rays; from the same man it constructs two different phantoms,
and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it, and the
shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader. 
Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations. 
Babylon violated lessens Alexander, Rome enchained lessens Caesar,
Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus, tyranny follows the tyrant. 
It is a misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which
bears his form.



CHAPTER V

THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES


Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle;
a beginning which was troubled, uncertain, hesitating, menacing to
both armies, but still more so for the English than for the French.

It had rained all night, the earth had been cut up by the downpour,
the water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain
as if in casks; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages
was buried up to the axles, the circingles of the horses were dripping
with liquid mud.  If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort
of transports on the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a
litter beneath the wheels, all movement, particularly in the valleys,
in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible.

The affair began late.  Napoleon, as we have already explained,
was in the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand,
like a pistol, aiming it now at one point, now at another,
of the battle; and it had been his wish to wait until the horse
batteries could move and gallop freely.  In order to do that it
was necessary that the sun should come out and dry the soil. 
But the sun did not make its appearance.  It was no longer
the rendezvous of Austerlitz.  When the first cannon was fired,
the English general, Colville, looked at his watch, and noted
that it was thirty-five minutes past eleven.

The action was begun furiously, with more fury, perhaps, than the
Emperor would have wished, by the left wing of the French resting
on Hougomont.  At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by
hurling Quiot's brigade on La Haie-Sainte, and Ney pushed forward
the right wing of the French against the left wing of the English,
which rested on Papelotte.

The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint; the plan was
to draw Wellington thither, and to make him swerve to the left. 
This plan would have succeeded if the four companies of the English
guards and the brave Belgians of Perponcher's division had not held the
position solidly, and Wellington, instead of massing his troops there,
could confine himself to despatching thither, as reinforcements,
only four more companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick.

The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated,
in fact, to overthrow the English left, to cut off the road
to Brussels, to bar the passage against possible Prussians,
to force Mont-Saint-Jean, to turn Wellington back on Hougomont,
thence on Braine-l'Alleud, thence on Hal; nothing easier. 
With the exception of a few incidents this attack succeeded
Papelotte was taken; La Haie-Sainte was carried.

A detail to be noted.  There was in the English infantry,
particularly in Kempt's brigade, a great many raw recruits.  These young
soldiers were valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry;
their inexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma;
they performed particularly excellent service as skirmishers: 
the soldier skirmisher, left somewhat to himself, becomes, so to speak,
his own general.  These recruits displayed some of the French
ingenuity and fury.  This novice of an infantry had dash. 
This displeased Wellington.

After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered.

There is in this day an obscure interval, from mid-day to four o'clock;
the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct, and participates
in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict.  Twilight reigns
over it.  We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog, a dizzy mirage,
paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day, pendant colbacks,
floating sabre-taches, cross-belts, cartridge-boxes for grenades,
hussar dolmans, red boots with a thousand wrinkles, heavy shakos
garlanded with torsades, the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled
with the scarlet infantry of England, the English soldiers with great,
white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets,
the Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather,
with brass hands and red horse-tails, the Scotch with their bare
knees and plaids, the great white gaiters of our grenadiers;
pictures, not strategic lines--what Salvator Rosa requires,
not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval.

A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle. 
Quid obscurum, quid divinum.  Each historian traces, to some extent,
the particular feature which pleases him amid this pellmell. 
Whatever may be the combinations of the generals, the shock of armed
masses has an incalculable ebb.  During the action the plans of
the two leaders enter into each other and become mutually thrown
out of shape.  Such a point of the field of battle devours more
combatants than such another, just as more or less spongy soils
soak up more or less quickly the water which is poured on them. 
It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers than one would like;
a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen.  The line of battle
waves and undulates like a thread, the trails of blood gush illogically,
the fronts of the armies waver, the regiments form capes and gulfs
as they enter and withdraw; all these reefs are continually moving
in front of each other.  Where the infantry stood the artillery arrives,
the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was, the battalions are
like smoke.  There was something there; seek it.  It has disappeared;
the open spots change place, the sombre folds advance and retreat,
a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward, hurls back,
distends, and disperses these tragic multitudes.  What is a fray?
an oscillation?  The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses
a minute, not a day.  In order to depict a battle, there is required
one of those powerful painters who have chaos in their brushes. 
Rembrandt is better than Vandermeulen; Vandermeulen, exact at noon,
lies at three o'clock. Geometry is deceptive; the hurricane alone
is trustworthy.  That is what confers on Folard the right to
contradict Polybius.  Let us add, that there is a certain instant
when the battle degenerates into a combat, becomes specialized,
and disperses into innumerable detailed feats, which, to borrow
the expression of Napoleon himself, "belong rather to the biography
of the regiments than to the history of the army."  The historian has,
in this case, the evident right to sum up the whole.  He cannot
do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle, and it
is not given to any one narrator, however conscientious he may be,
to fix, absolutely, the form of that horrible cloud which is called
a battle.

This, which is true of all great armed encounters, is particularly
applicable to Waterloo.

Nevertheless, at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came
to a point.



CHAPTER VI

FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON


Towards four o'clock the condition of the English army was serious. 
The Prince of Orange was in command of the centre, Hill of the
right wing, Picton of the left wing.  The Prince of Orange,
desperate and intrepid, shouted to the Hollando-Belgians: "Nassau! 
Brunswick!  Never retreat!"  Hill, having been weakened, had come up
to the support of Wellington; Picton was dead.  At the very moment
when the English had captured from the French the flag of the 105th
of the line, the French had killed the English general, Picton, with a
bullet through the head.  The battle had, for Wellington, two bases
of action, Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte; Hougomont still held out,
but was on fire; La Haie-Sainte was taken.  Of the German battalion
which defended it, only forty-two men survived; all the officers,
except five, were either dead or captured.  Three thousand combatants
had been massacred in that barn.  A sergeant of the English Guards,
the foremost boxer in England, reputed invulnerable by his companions,
had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy. Baring had
been dislodged, Alten put to the sword.  Many flags had been lost,
one from Alten's division, and one from the battalion of Lunenburg,
carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts. The Scotch Grays no
longer existed; Ponsonby's great dragoons had been hacked to pieces. 
That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro and
beneath the cuirassiers of Travers; out of twelve hundred horses,
six hundred remained; out of three lieutenant-colonels, two lay
on the earth,--Hamilton wounded, Mater slain.  Ponsonby had fallen,
riddled by seven lance-thrusts. Gordon was dead.  Marsh was dead. 
Two divisions, the fifth and the sixth, had been annihilated.

Hougomont injured, La Haie-Sainte taken, there now existed but
one rallying-point, the centre.  That point still held firm. 
Wellington reinforced it.  He summoned thither Hill, who was
at Merle-Braine; he summoned Chasse, who was at Braine-l'Alleud.

The centre of the English army, rather concave, very dense,
and very compact, was strongly posted.  It occupied the plateau
of Mont-Saint-Jean, having behind it the village, and in front of it
the slope, which was tolerably steep then.  It rested on that stout
stone dwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles,
and which marks the intersection of the roads--a pile of the
sixteenth century, and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from
it without injuring it.  All about the plateau the English had cut
the hedges here and there, made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees, thrust
the throat of a cannon between two branches, embattled the shrubs. 
There artillery was ambushed in the brushwood.  This punic labor,
incontestably authorized by war, which permits traps, was so well done,
that Haxo, who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o'clock
in the morning to reconnoitre the enemy's batteries, had discovered
nothing of it, and had returned and reported to Napoleon that there
were no obstacles except the two barricades which barred the road
to Nivelles and to Genappe.  It was at the season when the grain
is tall; on the edge of the plateau a battalion of Kempt's brigade,
the 95th, armed with carabines, was concealed in the tall wheat.

Thus assured and buttressed, the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was
well posted.  The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes,
then adjoining the field of battle, and intersected by the ponds
of Groenendael and Boitsfort.  An army could not retreat thither
without dissolving; the regiments would have broken up immediately there. 
The artillery would have been lost among the morasses.  The retreat,
according to many a man versed in the art,--though it is disputed
by others,--would have been a disorganized flight.

To this centre, Wellington added one of Chasse's brigades taken
from the right wing, and one of Wincke's brigades taken from the
left wing, plus Clinton's division.  To his English, to the regiments
of Halkett, to the brigades of Mitchell, to the guards of Maitland,
he gave as reinforcements and aids, the infantry of Brunswick,
Nassau's contingent, Kielmansegg's Hanoverians, and Ompteda's
Germans.  This placed twenty-six battalions under his hand. 
The right wing, as Charras says, was thrown back on the centre. 
An enormous battery was masked by sacks of earth at the spot
where there now stands what is called the "Museum of Waterloo." 
Besides this, Wellington had, behind a rise in the ground,
Somerset's Dragoon Guards, fourteen hundred horse strong. 
It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated English cavalry. 
Ponsonby destroyed, Somerset remained.

The battery, which, if completed, would have been almost a redoubt,
was ranged behind a very low garden wall, backed up with a coating
of bags of sand and a large slope of earth.  This work was not finished;
there had been no time to make a palisade for it.

Wellington, uneasy but impassive, was on horseback, and there
remained the whole day in the same attitude, a little in advance
of the old mill of Mont-Saint-Jean, which is still in existence,
beneath an elm, which an Englishman, an enthusiastic vandal,
purchased later on for two hundred francs, cut down, and carried off. 
Wellington was coldly heroic.  The bullets rained about him. 
His aide-de-camp, Gordon, fell at his side.  Lord Hill, pointing to a
shell which had burst, said to him:  "My lord, what are your orders
in case you are killed?"  "To do like me," replied Wellington. 
To Clinton he said laconically, "To hold this spot to the last man." 
The day was evidently turning out ill.  Wellington shouted to his
old companions of Talavera, of Vittoria, of Salamanca:  "Boys, can
retreat be thought of?  Think of old England!"

Towards four o'clock, the English line drew back.  Suddenly nothing
was visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery
and the sharpshooters; the rest had disappeared:  the regiments,
dislodged by the shells and the French bullets, retreated into the bottom,
now intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean;
a retrograde movement took place, the English front hid itself,
Wellington drew back.  "The beginning of retreat!" cried Napoleon.



CHAPTER VII

NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR


The Emperor, though ill and discommoded on horseback by a
local trouble, had never been in a better humor than on that day. 
His impenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning.  On the
18th of June, that profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly. 
The man who had been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo. 
The greatest favorites of destiny make mistakes.  Our joys are
composed of shadow.  The supreme smile is God's alone.

Ridet Caesar, Pompeius flebit, said the legionaries of the
Fulminatrix Legion.  Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion,
but it is certain that Caesar laughed.  While exploring on horseback
at one o'clock on the preceding night, in storm and rain, in company
with Bertrand, the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme,
satisfied at the sight of the long line of the English camp-fires
illuminating the whole horizon from Frischemont to Braine-l'Alleud,
it had seemed to him that fate, to whom he had assigned a day on the
field of Waterloo, was exact to the appointment; he stopped his horse,
and remained for some time motionless, gazing at the lightning
and listening to the thunder; and this fatalist was heard to cast
into the darkness this mysterious saying, "We are in accord." 
Napoleon was mistaken.  They were no longer in accord.

He took not a moment for sleep; every instant of that night was marked
by a joy for him.  He traversed the line of the principal outposts,
halting here and there to talk to the sentinels.  At half-past two,
near the wood of Hougomont, he heard the tread of a column on
the march; he thought at the moment that it was a retreat on the part
of Wellington.  He said:  "It is the rear-guard of the English
getting under way for the purpose of decamping.  I will take
prisoners the six thousand English who have just arrived at Ostend." 
He conversed expansively; he regained the animation which he had
shown at his landing on the first of March, when he pointed out
to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of the Gulf Juan,
and cried, "Well, Bertrand, here is a reinforcement already!" 
On the night of the 17th to the 18th of June he rallied Wellington. 
"That little Englishman needs a lesson," said Napoleon.  The rain
redoubled in violence; the thunder rolled while the Emperor
was speaking.

At half-past three o'clock in the morning, he lost one illusion;
officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him
that the enemy was not making any movement.  Nothing was stirring;
not a bivouac-fire had been extinguished; the English army was asleep. 
The silence on earth was profound; the only noise was in the heavens. 
At four o'clock, a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts;
this peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry,
probably Vivian's brigade, which was on its way to take up a position
in the village of Ohain, at the extreme left.  At five o'clock,
two Belgian deserters reported to him that they had just quitted
their regiment, and that the English army was ready for battle. 
"So much the better!" exclaimed Napoleon.  "I prefer to overthrow them
rather than to drive them back."

In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms
an angle with the Plancenoit road, had a kitchen table and a peasant's
chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself,
with a truss of straw for a carpet, and spread out on the table
the chart of the battle-field, saying to Soult as he did so,
"A pretty checker-board."

In consequence of the rains during the night, the transports
of provisions, embedded in the soft roads, had not been able
to arrive by morning; the soldiers had had no sleep; they were
wet and fasting.  This did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming
cheerfully to Ney, "We have ninety chances out of a hundred." 
At eight o'clock the Emperor's breakfast was brought to him. 
He invited many generals to it.  During breakfast, it was said
that Wellington had been to a ball two nights before, in Brussels,
at the Duchess of Richmond's; and Soult, a rough man of war,
with a face of an archbishop, said, "The ball takes place to-day."
The Emperor jested with Ney, who said, "Wellington will not be so
simple as to wait for Your Majesty."  That was his way, however. 
"He was fond of jesting," says Fleury de Chaboulon.  "A merry
humor was at the foundation of his character," says Gourgaud. 
"He abounded in pleasantries, which were more peculiar than witty,"
says Benjamin Constant.  These gayeties of a giant are worthy
of insistence.  It was he who called his grenadiers "his grumblers";
he pinched their ears; he pulled their mustaches.  "The Emperor
did nothing but play pranks on us," is the remark of one of them. 
During the mysterious trip from the island of Elba to France,
on the 27th of February, on the open sea, the French brig of war,
Le Zephyr, having encountered the brig L'Inconstant, on which Napoleon
was concealed, and having asked the news of Napoleon from L'Inconstant,
the Emperor, who still wore in his hat the white and amaranthine
cockade sown with bees, which he had adopted at the isle of Elba,
laughingly seized the speaking-trumpet, and answered for himself,
"The Emperor is well."  A man who laughs like that is on familiar
terms with events.  Napoleon indulged in many fits of this laughter
during the breakfast at Waterloo.  After breakfast he meditated
for a quarter of an hour; then two generals seated themselves on
the truss of straw, pen in hand and their paper on their knees,
and the Emperor dictated to them the order of battle.

At nine o'clock, at the instant when the French army, ranged in
echelons and set in motion in five columns, had deployed--
the divisions in two lines, the artillery between the brigades,
the music at their head; as they beat the march, with rolls on the drums
and the blasts of trumpets, mighty, vast, joyous, a sea of casques,
of sabres, and of bayonets on the horizon, the Emperor was touched,
and twice exclaimed, "Magnificent!  Magnificent!"

Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army, incredible as it
may appear, had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines,
forming, to repeat the Emperor's expression, "the figure of six V's."
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array, in the midst
of that profound silence, like that which heralds the beginning
of a storm, which precedes engagements, the Emperor tapped Haxo on
the shoulder, as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders,
detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon, Reille, and Lobau,
and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean, which was
situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads,
and said to him, "There are four and twenty handsome maids, General."

Sure of the issue, he encouraged with a smile, as they passed
before him, the company of sappers of the first corps, which he
had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village
should be carried.  All this serenity had been traversed by but
a single word of haughty pity; perceiving on his left, at a spot
where there now stands a large tomb, those admirable Scotch Grays,
with their superb horses, massing themselves, he said, "It is a pity."

Then he mounted his horse, advanced beyond Rossomme, and selected
for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right
of the road from Genappe to Brussels, which was his second station
during the battle.  The third station, the one adopted at seven
o'clock in the evening, between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte,
is formidable; it is a rather elevated knoll, which still exists,
and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain. 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of
the road, up to Napoleon himself.  As at Brienne, he had over
his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery. 
Mouldy cannon-balls, old sword-blades, and shapeless projectiles,
eaten up with rust, were picked up at the spot where his horse'
feet stood.  Scabra rubigine.  A few years ago, a shell of sixty pounds,
still charged, and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb,
was unearthed.  It was at this last post that the Emperor said
to his guide, Lacoste, a hostile and terrified peasant, who was
attached to the saddle of a hussar, and who turned round at every
discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon:  "Fool, it
is shameful!  You'll get yourself killed with a ball in the back." 
He who writes these lines has himself found, in the friable soil
of this knoll, on turning over the sand, the remains of the neck
of a bomb, disintegrated, by the oxidization of six and forty years,
and old fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between
the fingers.

Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains,
where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place,
are no longer what they were on June 18, 1815.  By taking from this
mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it, its real
relief has been taken away, and history, disconcerted, no longer
finds her bearings there.  It has been disfigured for the sake
of glorifying it.  Wellington, when he beheld Waterloo once more,
two years later, exclaimed, "They have altered my field of battle!" 
Where the great pyramid of earth, surmounted by the lion,
rises to-day, there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope
towards the Nivelles road, but which was almost an escarpment
on the side of the highway to Genappe.  The elevation of this
escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls
of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe
to Brussels:  one, the English tomb, is on the left; the other,
the German tomb, is on the right.  There is no French tomb.  The whole
of that plain is a sepulchre for France.  Thanks to the thousands
upon thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one
hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference,
the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope. 
On the day of battle, particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte,
it was abrupt and difficult of approach.  The slope there is so
steep that the English cannon could not see the farm, situated in
the bottom of the valley, which was the centre of the combat. 
On the 18th of June, 1815, the rains had still farther increased
this acclivity, the mud complicated the problem of the ascent,
and the men not only slipped back, but stuck fast in the mire. 
Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it
was impossible for the distant observer to divine.

What was this trench?  Let us explain.  Braine-l'Alleud is a
Belgian village; Ohain is another.  These villages, both of them
concealed in curves of the landscape, are connected by a road about
a league and a half in length, which traverses the plain along its
undulating level, and often enters and buries itself in the hills
like a furrow, which makes a ravine of this road in some places. 
In 1815, as at the present day, this road cut the crest of the plateau
of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles;
only, it is now on a level with the plain; it was then a hollow way. 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock. 
This road was, and still is, a trench throughout the greater portion
of its course; a hollow trench, sometimes a dozen feet in depth,
and whose banks, being too steep, crumbled away here and there,
particularly in winter, under driving rains.  Accidents happened here. 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a
passer-by was crushed by a cart, as is proved by a stone cross
which stands near the cemetery, and which gives the name of the dead,
Monsieur Bernard Debrye, Merchant of Brussels, and the date of
the accident, February, 1637.[8] It was so deep on the table-land
of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant, Mathieu Nicaise, was crushed there,
in 1783, by a slide from the slope, as is stated on another stone cross,
the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground,
but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope
to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm
of Mont-Saint-Jean.

[8] This is the inscription:--
                       D. O. M.
                    CY A ETE ECRASE
                       PAR MALHEUR
                    SOUS UN CHARIOT,
                    MONSIEUR BERNARD
                    DE BRYE MARCHAND
               A BRUXELLE LE [Illegible]
                      FEVRIER 1637.


On the day of battle, this hollow road whose existence was in no
way indicated, bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean, a trench
at the summit of the escarpment, a rut concealed in the soil,
was invisible; that is to say, terrible.



CHAPTER VIII

THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE

So, on the morning of Waterloo, Napoleon was content.

He was right; the plan of battle conceived by him was, as we have seen,
really admirable.

The battle once begun, its very various changes,--the resistance
of Hougomont; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte; the killing of Bauduin;
the disabling of Foy; the unexpected wall against which Soye's
brigade was shattered; Guilleminot's fatal heedlessness when he
had neither petard nor powder sacks; the miring of the batteries;
the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge;
the small effect of the bombs falling in the English lines, and there
embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil, and only succeeding
in producing volcanoes of mud, so that the canister was turned into
a splash; the uselessness of Pire's demonstration on Braine-l'Alleud;
all that cavalry, fifteen squadrons, almost exterminated; the right
wing of the English badly alarmed, the left wing badly cut into;
Ney's strange mistake in massing, instead of echelonning the four
divisions of the first corps; men delivered over to grape-shot,
arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two hundred;
the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls;
attacking columns disorganized; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on
their flank; Bourgeois, Donzelot, and Durutte compromised; Quiot repulsed;
Lieutenant Vieux, that Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School,
wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an axe the door
of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire of the English barricade
which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to Brussels;
Marcognet's division caught between the infantry and the cavalry,
shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best
and Pack, put to the sword by Ponsonby; his battery of seven
pieces spiked; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding,
in spite of the Comte d'Erlon, both Frischemont and Smohain;
the flag of the 105th taken, the flag of the 45th captured; that black
Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three
hundred light cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit;
the alarming things that had been said by prisoners; Grouchy's delay;
fifteen hundred men killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less
than an hour; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a still shorter
time about La Haie-Sainte,--all these stormy incidents passing
like the clouds of battle before Napoleon, had hardly troubled
his gaze and had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty. 
Napoleon was accustomed to gaze steadily at war; he never added
up the heart-rending details, cipher by cipher; ciphers mattered
little to him, provided that they furnished the total, victory;
he was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray, since he
thought himself the master and the possessor at the end; he knew
how to wait, supposing himself to be out of the question, and he
treated destiny as his equal:  he seemed to say to fate, Thou wilt
not dare.

Composed half of light and half of shadow, Napoleon thought himself
protected in good and tolerated in evil.  He had, or thought
that he had, a connivance, one might almost say a complicity,
of events in his favor, which was equivalent to the invulnerability
of antiquity.

Nevertheless, when one has Beresina, Leipzig, and Fontainebleau
behind one, it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo. 
A mysterious frown becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens.

At the moment when Wellington retreated, Napoleon shuddered. 
He suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared,
and the van of the English army disappear.  It was rallying,
but hiding itself.  The Emperor half rose in his stirrups. 
The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes.

Wellington, driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes
and destroyed--that was the definitive conquest of England by France;
it was Crecy, Poitiers, Malplaquet, and Ramillies avenged. 
The man of Marengo was wiping out Agincourt.

So the Emperor, meditating on this terrible turn of fortune,
swept his glass for the last time over all the points of the field
of battle.  His guard, standing behind him with grounded arms,
watched him from below with a sort of religion.  He pondered;
he examined the slopes, noted the declivities, scrutinized the
clumps of trees, the square of rye, the path; he seemed to be
counting each bush.  He gazed with some intentness at the English
barricades of the two highways,--two large abatis of trees, that on
the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte, armed with two cannon,
the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded the
extremity of the field of battle, and that on the road to Nivelles
where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse's brigade.  Near this
barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas, painted white,
which stands at the angle of the cross-road near Braine-l'Alleud;
he bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste.  The guide
made a negative sign with his head, which was probably perfidious.

The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking.

Wellington had drawn back.

All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him.

Napoleon turning round abruptly, despatched an express at full
speed to Paris to announce that the battle was won.

Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts.

He had just found his clap of thunder.

He gave orders to Milhaud's cuirassiers to carry the table-land
of Mont-Saint-Jean.



CHAPTER IX

THE UNEXPECTED


There were three thousand five hundred of them.  They formed
a front a quarter of a league in extent.  They were giant men,
on colossal horses.  There were six and twenty squadrons of them;
and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes's
division,--the one hundred and six picked gendarmes, the light
cavalry of the Guard, eleven hundred and ninety-seven men,
and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances. 
They wore casques without horse-tails, and cuirasses of beaten iron,
with horse-pistols in their holsters, and long sabre-swords. That
morning the whole army had admired them, when, at nine o'clock,
with braying of trumpets and all the music playing "Let us watch
o'er the Safety of the Empire," they had come in a solid column,
with one of their batteries on their flank, another in their centre,
and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont,
and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line,
so cleverly arranged by Napoleon, which, having on its extreme
left Kellermann's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud's
cuirassiers, had, so to speak, two wings of iron.

Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor's orders.  Ney drew
his sword and placed himself at their head.  The enormous squadrons
were set in motion.

Then a formidable spectacle was seen.

All their cavalry, with upraised swords, standards and trumpets
flung to the breeze, formed in columns by divisions, descended,
by a simultaneous movement and like one man, with the precision
of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach, the hill
of La Belle Alliance, plunged into the terrible depths in which
so many men had already fallen, disappeared there in the smoke,
then emerging from that shadow, reappeared on the other side of
the valley, still compact and in close ranks, mounting at a full trot,
through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them, the terrible
muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean. They ascended,
grave, threatening, imperturbable; in the intervals between the
musketry and the artillery, their colossal trampling was audible. 
Being two divisions, there were two columns of them; Wathier's division
held the right, Delort's division was on the left.  It seemed as
though two immense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards
the crest of the table-land. It traversed the battle like a prodigy.

Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt
of the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry; Murat was lacking here, but Ney
was again present.  It seemed as though that mass had become a monster
and had but one soul.  Each column undulated and swelled like the
ring of a polyp.  They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke
which was rent here and there.  A confusion of helmets, of cries,
of sabres, a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons
and the flourish of trumpets, a terrible and disciplined tumult;
over all, the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra.

These narrations seemed to belong to another age.  Something parallel
to this vision appeared, no doubt, in the ancient Orphic epics,
which told of the centaurs, the old hippanthropes, those Titans
with human heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at
a gallop, horrible, invulnerable, sublime--gods and beasts.

Odd numerical coincidence,--twenty-six battalions rode to meet
twenty-six battalions.  Behind the crest of the plateau, in the
shadow of the masked battery, the English infantry, formed into
thirteen squares, two battalions to the square, in two lines,
with seven in the first line, six in the second, the stocks
of their guns to their shoulders, taking aim at that which was on
the point of appearing, waited, calm, mute, motionless.  They did
not see the cuirassiers, and the cuirassiers did not see them. 
They listened to the rise of this flood of men.  They heard the
swelling noise of three thousand horse, the alternate and symmetrical
tramp of their hoofs at full trot, the jingling of the cuirasses,
the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing. 
There ensued a most terrible silence; then, all at once, a long file
of uplifted arms, brandishing sabres, appeared above the crest,
and casques, trumpets, and standards, and three thousand heads with
gray mustaches, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!" All this cavalry debouched
on the plateau, and it was like the appearance of an earthquake.

All at once, a tragic incident; on the English left, on our right,
the head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor. 
On arriving at the culminating point of the crest, ungovernable,
utterly given over to fury and their course of extermination of the
squares and cannon, the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench,--
a trench between them and the English.  It was the hollow road of Ohain.

It was a terrible moment.  The ravine was there, unexpected, yawning,
directly under the horses' feet, two fathoms deep between its
double slopes; the second file pushed the first into it, and the third
pushed on the second; the horses reared and fell backward, landed on
their haunches, slid down, all four feet in the air, crushing and
overwhelming the riders; and there being no means of retreat,--
the whole column being no longer anything more than a projectile,--
the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed
the French; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled;
horses and riders rolled there pell-mell, grinding each other,
forming but one mass of flesh in this gulf:  when this trench
was full of living men, the rest marched over them and passed on. 
Almost a third of Dubois's brigade fell into that abyss.

This began the loss of the battle.

A local tradition, which evidently exaggerates matters, says that two
thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow
road of Ohain.  This figure probably comprises all the other corpses
which were flung into this ravine the day after the combat.

Let us note in passing that it was Dubois's sorely tried brigade which,
an hour previously, making a charge to one side, had captured
the flag of the Lunenburg battalion.

Napoleon, before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud's
cuirassiers, had scrutinized the ground, but had not been able to see
that hollow road, which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of
the plateau.  Warned, nevertheless, and put on the alert by the little
white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway,
he had probably put a question as to the possibility of an obstacle,
to the guide Lacoste.  The guide had answered No. We might almost affirm
that Napoleon's catastrophe originated in that sign of a peasant's head.

Other fatalities were destined to arise.

Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle? 
We answer No. Why?  Because of Wellington?  Because of Blucher? 
No. Because of God.

Bonaparte victor at Waterloo; that does not come within the law of
the nineteenth century.  Another series of facts was in preparation,
in which there was no longer any room for Napoleon.  The ill will
of events had declared itself long before.

It was time that this vast man should fall.

The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance. 
This individual alone counted for more than a universal group. 
These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head;
the world mounting to the brain of one man,--this would be mortal
to civilization were it to last.  The moment had arrived for the
incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan.  Probably the
principles and the elements, on which the regular gravitations
of the moral, as of the material, world depend, had complained. 
Smoking blood, over-filled cemeteries, mothers in tears,--
these are formidable pleaders.  When the earth is suffering from
too heavy a burden, there are mysterious groanings of the shades,
to which the abyss lends an ear.

Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been
decided on.

He embarrassed God.

Waterloo is not a battle; it is a change of front on the part
of the Universe.



CHAPTER X

THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN


The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine.

Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank
on the cuirassiers.  The intrepid General Delort made the military
salute to the English battery.

The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered
the squares at a gallop.  The cuirassiers had not had even the
time for a halt.  The disaster of the hollow road had decimated,
but not discouraged them.  They belonged to that class of men who,
when diminished in number, increase in courage.

Wathier's column alone had suffered in the disaster; Delort's column,
which Ney had deflected to the left, as though he had a presentiment
of an ambush, had arrived whole.

The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares.

At full speed, with bridles loose, swords in their teeth pistols
in fist,--such was the attack.

There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man
until the soldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh
turns into granite.  The English battalions, desperately assaulted,
did not stir.

Then it was terrible.

All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once. 
A frenzied whirl enveloped them.  That cold infantry remained impassive. 
The first rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets,
the second ranks shot them down; behind the second rank the cannoneers
charged their guns, the front of the square parted, permitted the passage
of an eruption of grape-shot, and closed again.  The cuirassiers
replied by crushing them.  Their great horses reared, strode across
the ranks, leaped over the bayonets and fell, gigantic, in the midst
of these four living wells.  The cannon-balls ploughed furrows
in these cuirassiers; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares. 
Files of men disappeared, ground to dust under the horses.  The bayonets
plunged into the bellies of these centaurs; hence a hideousness of
wounds which has probably never been seen anywhere else.  The squares,
wasted by this mad cavalry, closed up their ranks without flinching. 
Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot, they created explosions
in their assailants' midst.  The form of this combat was monstrous. 
These squares were no longer battalions, they were craters;
those cuirassiers were no longer cavalry, they were a tempest. 
Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud; lava contended
with lightning.

The square on the extreme right, the most exposed of all,
being in the air, was almost annihilated at the very first shock. 
lt was formed of the 75th regiment of Highlanders.  The bagpipe-player
in the centre dropped his melancholy eyes, filled with the reflections
of the forests and the lakes, in profound inattention, while men
were being exterminated around him, and seated on a drum, with his
pibroch under his arm, played the Highland airs.  These Scotchmen
died thinking of Ben Lothian, as did the Greeks recalling Argos. 
The sword of a cuirassier, which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm
which bore it, put an end to the song by killing the singer.

The cuirassiers, relatively few in number, and still further diminished
by the catastrophe of the ravine, had almost the whole English army
against them, but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them
was equal to ten.  Nevertheless, some Hanoverian battalions yielded. 
Wellington perceived it, and thought of his cavalry.  Had Napoleon
at that same moment thought of his infantry, he would have won
the battle.  This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake.

All at once, the cuirassiers, who had been the assailants,
found themselves assailed.  The English cavalry was at their back. 
Before them two squares, behind them Somerset; Somerset meant
fourteen hundred dragoons of the guard.  On the right, Somerset had
Dornberg with the German light-horse, and on his left, Trip with
the Belgian carabineers; the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and
in front, before and in the rear, by infantry and cavalry, had to
face all sides.  What mattered it to them?  They were a whirlwind. 
Their valor was something indescribable.

In addition to this, they had behind them the battery, which was
still thundering.  It was necessary that it should be so, or they
could never have been wounded in the back.  One of their cuirasses,
pierced on the shoulder by a ball from a biscayan,[9] is in the
collection of the Waterloo Museum.


[9] A heavy rifled gun.


For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed. 
It was no longer a hand-to-hand conflict; it was a shadow, a fury,
a dizzy transport of souls and courage, a hurricane of lightning swords. 
In an instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only
eight hundred.  Fuller, their lieutenant-colonel, fell dead. 
Ney rushed up with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes's light-horse.
The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured, recaptured, captured again. 
The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry;
or, to put it more exactly, the whole of that formidable rout
collared each other without releasing the other.  The squares still
held firm.

There were a dozen assaults.  Ney had four horses killed under him. 
Half the cuirassiers remained on the plateau.  This conflict lasted
two hours.

The English army was profoundly shaken.  There is no doubt that,
had they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster
of the hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre
and decided the victory.  This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton,
who had seen Talavera and Badajoz.  Wellington, three-quarters vanquished,
admired heroically.  He said in an undertone, "Sublime!"

The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen, took or
spiked sixty pieces of ordnance, and captured from the English
regiments six flags, which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of
the Guard bore to the Emperor, in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance.

Wellington's situation had grown worse.  This strange battle
was like a duel between two raging, wounded men, each of whom,
still fighting and still resisting, is expending all his blood.

Which of the two will be the first to fall?

The conflict on the plateau continued.

What had become of the cuirassiers?  No one could have told. 
One thing is certain, that on the day after the battle, a cuirassier
and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales
for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean, at the very point where the four
roads from Nivelles, Genappe, La Hulpe, and Brussels meet and
intersect each other.  This horseman had pierced the English lines. 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean.
His name is Dehaze.  He was eighteen years old at that time.

Wellington felt that he was yielding.  The crisis was at hand.

The cuirassiers had not succeeded, since the centre was not
broken through.  As every one was in possession of the plateau, no one
held it, and in fact it remained, to a great extent, with the English. 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain; Ney had only the
crest and the slope.  They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides.

But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable. 
The bleeding of that army was horrible.  Kempt, on the left wing,
demanded reinforcements.  "There are none," replied Wellington;
"he must let himself be killed!"  Almost at that same moment,
a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies,
Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon, and Napoleon exclaimed, "Infantry! 
Where does he expect me to get it?  Does he think I can make it?"

Nevertheless, the English army was in the worse case of the two. 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron
and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing.  A few
men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and
such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant;
Alten's division, already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte,
was almost destroyed; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze's brigade
strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road; hardly anything
was left of those Dutch grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards
in our ranks in 1811, fought against Wellington; and who, in 1815,
rallied to the English standard, fought against Napoleon. 
The loss in officers was considerable.  Lord Uxbridge, who had
his leg buried on the following day, had his knee shattered. 
If, on the French side, in that tussle of the cuirassiers, Delort,
l'Heritier, Colbert, Dnop, Travers, and Blancard were disabled,
on the side of the English there was Alten wounded, Barne wounded,
Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Ompteda killed, the whole
of Wellington's staff decimated, and England had the worse of it
in that bloody scale.  The second regiment of foot-guards had
lost five lieutenant-colonels, four captains, and three ensigns;
the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and
1,200 soldiers; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded,
18 officers killed, 450 soldiers killed.  The Hanoverian hussars
of Cumberland, a whole regiment, with Colonel Hacke at its head,
who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered, had turned
bridle in the presence of the fray, and had fled to the forest
of Soignes, sowing defeat all the way to Brussels.  The transports,
ammunition-wagons, the baggage-wagons, the wagons filled with wounded,
on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching
the forest, rushed headlong thither.  The Dutch, mowed down by the
French cavalry, cried, "Alarm!"  From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael,
for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels,
according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive,
the roads were encumbered with fugitives.  This panic was such
that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin, and Louis XVIII. 
at Ghent.  With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned
behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean,
and of Vivian's and Vandeleur's brigades, which flanked the left wing,
Wellington had no cavalry left.  A number of batteries lay unhorsed. 
These facts are attested by Siborne; and Pringle, exaggerating
the disaster, goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was
reduced to thirty-four thousand men.  The Iron Duke remained calm,
but his lips blanched.  Vincent, the Austrian commissioner, Alava,
the Spanish commissioner, who were present at the battle in the
English staff, thought the Duke lost.  At five o'clock Wellington
drew out his watch, and he was heard to murmur these sinister words,
"Blucher, or night!"

It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed
on the heights in the direction of Frischemont.

Here comes the change of face in this giant drama.



CHAPTER XI

A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW


The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known.  Grouchy hoped for,
Blucher arriving.  Death instead of life.

Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected;
it was Saint Helena that was seen.

If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow, Blucher's lieutenant,
had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont,
instead of below Plancenoit, the form of the nineteenth century might,
perhaps, have been different.  Napoleon would have won the battle
of Waterloo.  By any other route than that below Plancenoit,
the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable
for artillery, and Bulow would not have arrived.

Now the Prussian general, Muffling, declares that one hour's delay,
and Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet.  "The battle
was lost."

It was time that Bulow should arrive, as will be seen.  He had,
moreover, been very much delayed.  He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont,
and had set out at daybreak; but the roads were impassable, and his
divisions stuck fast in the mire.  The ruts were up to the hubs
of the cannons.  Moreover, he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on
the narrow bridge of Wavre; the street leading to the bridge had been
fired by the French, so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could
not pass between two rows of burning houses, and had been obliged
to wait until the conflagration was extinguished.  It was mid-day
before Bulow's vanguard had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert.

Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it would have been
over at four o'clock, and Blucher would have fallen on the battle
won by Napoleon.  Such are these immense risks proportioned
to an infinite which we cannot comprehend.

The Emperor had been the first, as early as mid-day, to descry
with his field-glass, on the extreme horizon, something which had
attracted his attention.  He had said, "I see yonder a cloud,
which seems to me to be troops."  Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie,
"Soult, what do you see in the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert?"
The marshal, levelling his glass, answered, "Four or five
thousand men, Sire; evidently Grouchy."  But it remained motionless
in the mist.  All the glasses of the staff had studied "the cloud"
pointed out by the Emperor.  Some said:  "It is trees."  The truth is,
that the cloud did not move.  The Emperor detached Domon's division
of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter.

Bulow had not moved, in fact.  His vanguard was very feeble,
and could accomplish nothing.  He was obliged to wait for the body
of the army corps, and he had received orders to concentrate his
forces before entering into line; but at five o'clock, perceiving
Wellington's peril, Blucher ordered Bulow to attack, and uttered
these remarkable words:  "We must give air to the English army."

A little later, the divisions of Losthin, Hiller, Hacke, and Ryssel
deployed before Lobau's corps, the cavalry of Prince William of
Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris, Plancenoit was in flames,
and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks
of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon.



CHAPTER XII

THE GUARD


Every one knows the rest,--the irruption of a third army; the battle
broken to pieces; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously;
Pirch the first coming up with Bulow; Zieten's cavalry led
by Blucher in person, the French driven back; Marcognet swept
from the plateau of Ohain; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte;
Donzelot and Quiot retreating; Lobau caught on the flank; a fresh
battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall;
the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward;
the gigantic breach made in the French army; the English grape-shot
and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other; the extermination;
disaster in front; disaster on the flank; the Guard entering the line
in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things.

Conscious that they were about to die, they shouted, "Vive l'Empereur!"
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting
forth in acclamations.

The sky had been overcast all day long.  All of a sudden, at that
very moment,--it was eight o'clock in the evening--the clouds on
the horizon parted, and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the
setting sun to pass through, athwart the elms on the Nivelles road. 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz.

Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this
final catastrophe.  Friant, Michel, Roguet, Harlet, Mallet,
Poret de Morvan, were there.  When the tall caps of the grenadiers
of the Guard, with their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared,
symmetrical, in line, tranquil, in the midst of that combat,
the enemy felt a respect for France; they thought they beheld twenty
victories entering the field of battle, with wings outspread,
and those who were the conquerors, believing themselves to be vanquished,
retreated; but Wellington shouted, "Up, Guards, and aim straight!" 
The red regiment of English guards, lying flat behind the hedges,
sprang up, a cloud of grape-shot riddled the tricolored flag
and whistled round our eagles; all hurled themselves forwards,
and the final carnage began.  In the darkness, the Imperial Guard
felt the army losing ground around it, and in the vast shock of
the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the place
of the "Vive l'Empereur!" and, with flight behind it, it continued
to advance, more crushed, losing more men at every step that it took. 
There were none who hesitated, no timid men in its ranks. 
The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general. 
Not a man was missing in that suicide.

Ney, bewildered, great with all the grandeur of accepted death,
offered himself to all blows in that tempest.  He had his fifth horse
killed under him there.  Perspiring, his eyes aflame, foaming at
the mouth, with uniform unbuttoned, one of his epaulets half cut
off by a sword-stroke from a horseguard, his plaque with the great
eagle dented by a bullet; bleeding, bemired, magnificent, a broken
sword in his hand, he said, "Come and see how a Marshal of France
dies on the field of battle!"  But in vain; he did not die. 
He was haggard and angry.  At Drouet d'Erlon he hurled this question,
"Are you not going to get yourself killed?"  In the midst of all
that artillery engaged in crushing a handful of men, he shouted: 
"So there is nothing for me!  Oh!  I should like to have all these
English bullets enter my bowels!"  Unhappy man, thou wert reserved
for French bullets!



CHAPTER XIII

THE CATASTROPHE

The rout behind the Guard was melancholy.

The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once,--Hougomont, La
Haie-Sainte, Papelotte, Plancenoit.  The cry "Treachery!" was
followed by a cry of "Save yourselves who can!"  An army which is
disbanding is like a thaw.  All yields, splits, cracks, floats,
rolls, falls, jostles, hastens, is precipitated.  The disintegration
is unprecedented.  Ney borrows a horse, leaps upon it, and without
hat, cravat, or sword, places himself across the Brussels road,
stopping both English and French.  He strives to detain the army,
he recalls it to its duty, he insults it, he clings to the rout. 
He is overwhelmed.  The soldiers fly from him, shouting, "Long live
Marshal Ney!"  Two of Durutte's regiments go and come in affright
as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans
and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt, Best, Pack, and Rylandt;
the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat; friends kill each
other in order to escape; squadrons and battalions break and disperse
against each other, like the tremendous foam of battle.  Lobau at
one extremity, and Reille at the other, are drawn into the tide. 
In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of his Guard;
in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable squadrons. 
Quiot retreats before Vivian, Kellermann before Vandeleur,
Lobau before Bulow, Morand before Pirch, Domon and Subervic before
Prince William of Prussia; Guyot, who led the Emperor's squadrons
to the charge, falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons. 
Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives, harangues, urges, threatens,
entreats them.  All the mouths which in the morning had shouted,
"Long live the Emperor!" remain gaping; they hardly recognize him. 
The Prussian cavalry, newly arrived, dashes forwards, flies, hews,
slashes, kills, exterminates.  Horses lash out, the cannons flee;
the soldiers of the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use
the horses to make their escape; transports overturned, with all
four wheels in the air, clog the road and occasion massacres. 
Men are crushed, trampled down, others walk over the dead and
the living.  Arms are lost.  A dizzy multitude fills the roads,
the paths, the bridges, the plains, the hills, the valleys,
the woods, encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men. 
Shouts despair, knapsacks and guns flung among the rye, passages forced
at the point of the sword, no more comrades, no more officers,
no more generals, an inexpressible terror.  Zieten putting France to the
sword at its leisure.  Lions converted into goats.  Such was the flight.

At Genappe, an effort was made to wheel about, to present a
battle front, to draw up in line.  Lobau rallied three hundred men. 
The entrance to the village was barricaded, but at the first volley
of Prussian canister, all took to flight again, and Lobau was taken. 
That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the
ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at
a few minutes' distance before you enter Genappe.  The Prussians
threw themselves into Genappe, furious, no doubt, that they were
not more entirely the conquerors.  The pursuit was stupendous. 
Blucher ordered extermination.  Roguet had set the lugubrious example
of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring him
a Prussian prisoner.  Blucher outdid Roguet.  Duhesme, the general
of the Young Guard, hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe,
surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death, who took the sword and
slew the prisoner.  The victory was completed by the assassination
of the vanquished.  Let us inflict punishment, since we are history: 
old Blucher disgraced himself.  This ferocity put the finishing
touch to the disaster.  The desperate route traversed Genappe,
traversed Quatre-Bras, traversed Gosselies, traversed Frasnes,
traversed Charleroi, traversed Thuin, and only halted at the frontier. 
Alas! and who, then, was fleeing in that manner?  The Grand Army.

This vertigo, this terror, this downfall into ruin of the loftiest
bravery which ever astounded history,--is that causeless? 
No. The shadow of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo. 
It is the day of destiny.  The force which is mightier than man
produced that day.  Hence the terrified wrinkle of those brows;
hence all those great souls surrendering their swords.  Those who had
conquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth, with nothing left
to say nor to do, feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence. 
Hoc erat in fatis.  That day the perspective of the human race
underwent a change.  Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century. 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the
great century.  Some one, a person to whom one replies not, took the
responsibility on himself.  The panic of heroes can be explained. 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud,
there is something of the meteor.  God has passed by.

At nightfall, in a meadow near Genappe, Bernard and Bertrand
seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man, haggard,
pensive, sinister, gloomy, who, dragged to that point by the
current of the rout, had just dismounted, had passed the bridle
of his horse over his arm, and with wild eye was returning
alone to Waterloo.  It was Napoleon, the immense somnambulist
of this dream which had crumbled, essaying once more to advance.



CHAPTER XIV

THE LAST SQUARE


Several squares of the Guard, motionless amid this stream of
the defeat, as rocks in running water, held their own until night. 
Night came, death also; they awaited that double shadow,
and, invincible, allowed themselves to be enveloped therein. 
Each regiment, isolated from the rest, and having no bond with
the army, now shattered in every part, died alone.  They had taken
up position for this final action, some on the heights of Rossomme,
others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean. There, abandoned, vanquished,
terrible, those gloomy squares endured their death-throes
in formidable fashion.  Ulm, Wagram, Jena, Friedland, died with them.

At twilight, towards nine o'clock in the evening, one of them was left
at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. In that fatal valley,
at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended,
now inundated by the masses of the English, under the converging
fires of the victorious hostile cavalry, under a frightful density
of projectiles, this square fought on.  It was commanded by an obscure
officer named Cambronne.  At each discharge, the square diminished
and replied.  It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade,
continually contracting its four walls.  The fugitives pausing
breathless for a moment in the distance, listened in the darkness
to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder.

When this legion had been reduced to a handful, when nothing was left
of their flag but a rag, when their guns, the bullets all gone,
were no longer anything but clubs, when the heap of corpses was larger
than the group of survivors, there reigned among the conquerors,
around those men dying so sublimely, a sort of sacred terror,
and the English artillery, taking breath, became silent.  This furnished
a sort of respite.  These combatants had around them something in
the nature of a swarm of spectres, silhouettes of men on horseback,
the black profiles of cannon, the white sky viewed through wheels
and gun-carriages, the colossal death's-head, which the heroes
saw constantly through the smoke, in the depths of the battle,
advanced upon them and gazed at them.  Through the shades of twilight
they could hear the pieces being loaded; the matches all lighted,
like the eyes of tigers at night, formed a circle round their heads;
all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons,
and then, with emotion, holding the supreme moment suspended above
these men, an English general, Colville according to some, Maitland
according to others, shouted to them, "Surrender, brave Frenchmen!" 
Cambronne replied, "-----."

{EDITOR'S COMMENTARY:  Another edition of this book has the word
"Merde!" in lieu of the ----- above.}



CHAPTER XV

CAMBRONNE


If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended,
one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is
perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made.  This would
enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History.

At our own risk and peril, let us violate this injunction.

Now, then, among those giants there was one Titan,--Cambronne.

To make that reply and then perish, what could be grander? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die; and it was not this
man's fault if he survived after he was shot.

The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon, who was put
to flight; nor Wellington, giving way at four o'clock, in despair
at five; nor Blucher, who took no part in the engagement. 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne.

To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills
you is to conquer!

Thus to answer the Catastrophe, thus to speak to Fate, to give
this pedestal to the future lion, to hurl such a challenge to the
midnight rainstorm, to the treacherous wall of Hougomont, to the
sunken road of Ohain, to Grouchy's delay, to Blucher's arrival,
to be Irony itself in the tomb, to act so as to stand upright
though fallen, to drown in two syllables the European coalition,
to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew, to make the lowest
of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France,
insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras, to finish Leonidas
with Rabellais, to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible
to speak, to lose the field and preserve history, to have the laugh
on your side after such a carnage,--this is immense!

It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl!  It reaches
the grandeur of AEschylus!

Cambronne's reply produces the effect of a violent break. 
'Tis like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn. 
'Tis the overflow of agony bursting forth.  Who conquered? 
Wellington?  No!  Had it not been for Blucher, he was lost. 
Was it Blucher?  No!  If Wellington had not begun, Blucher could
not have finished.  This Cambronne, this man spending his last hour,
this unknown soldier, this infinitesimal of war, realizes that here is
a falsehood, a falsehood in a catastrophe, and so doubly agonizing;
and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it,
he is offered this mockery,--life!  How could he restrain himself? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe, the general's flushed with victory,
the Jupiter's darting thunderbolts; they have a hundred thousand
victorious soldiers, and back of the hundred thousand a million;
their cannon stand with yawning mouths, the match is lighted; they grind
down under their heels the Imperial guards, and the grand army;
they have just crushed Napoleon, and only Cambronne remains,--
only this earthworm is left to protest.  He will protest.  Then he seeks
for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword.  His mouth froths,
and the froth is the word.  In face of this mean and mighty victory,
in face of this victory which counts none victorious, this desperate
soldier stands erect.  He grants its overwhelming immensity, but he
establishes its triviality; and he does more than spit upon it. 
Borne down by numbers, by superior force, by brute matter,
he finds in his soul an expression:  "Excrement!"  We repeat it,--
to use that word, to do thus, to invent such an expression, is to be
the conqueror!

The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent
on that unknown man.  Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as
Rouget invents the "Marseillaise," under the visitation of a breath
from on high.  An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth
and comes sweeping over these men, and they shake, and one of them
sings the song supreme, and the other utters the frightful cry.

This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe
in the name of the Empire,--that would be a trifle:  he hurls it at
the past in the name of the Revolution.  It is heard, and Cambronne
is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans. 
Danton seems to be speaking!  Kleber seems to be bellowing!

At that word from Cambronne, the English voice responded, "Fire!" 
The batteries flamed, the hill trembled, from all those brazen
mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot; a vast volume
of smoke, vaguely white in the light of the rising moon, rolled out,
and when the smoke dispersed, there was no longer anything there. 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated; the Guard was dead. 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone, and hardly was
there discernible, here and there, even a quiver in the bodies;
it was thus that the French legions, greater than the Roman legions,
expired on Mont-Saint-Jean, on the soil watered with rain and blood,
amid the gloomy grain, on the spot where nowadays Joseph, who drives
the post-wagon from Nivelles, passes whistling, and cheerfully
whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning.



CHAPTER XVI

QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE?


The battle of Waterloo is an enigma.  It is as obscure to those who
won it as to those who lost it.  For Napoleon it was a panic;[10]
Blucher sees nothing in it but fire; Wellington understands
nothing in regard to it.  Look at the reports.  The bulletins
are confused, the commentaries involved.  Some stammer, others lisp. 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments; Muffling cuts
it up into three changes; Charras alone, though we hold another
judgment than his on some points, seized with his haughty glance
the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius
in conflict with divine chance.  All the other historians suffer from
being somewhat dazzled, and in this dazzled state they fumble about. 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy; in fact, a crumbling of
the military monarchy which, to the vast stupefaction of kings,
drew all the kingdoms after it--the fall of force, the defeat of war.


[10] "A battle terminated, a day finished, false measures repaired,
greater successes assured for the morrow,--all was lost by a moment
of panic, terror."--Napoleon, Dictees de Sainte Helene.


In this event, stamped with superhuman necessity, the part played
by men amounts to nothing.

If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher, do we thereby deprive
England and Germany of anything?  No. Neither that illustrious
England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo. 
Thank Heaven, nations are great, independently of the lugubrious
feats of the sword.  Neither England, nor Germany, nor France
is contained in a scabbard.  At this epoch when Waterloo is
only a clashing of swords, above Blucher, Germany has Schiller;
above Wellington, England has Byron.  A vast dawn of ideas is the
peculiarity of our century, and in that aurora England and Germany
have a magnificent radiance.  They are majestic because they think. 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic
with them; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident. 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth
century has not Waterloo as its source.  It is only barbarous
peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory.  That is the
temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm.  Civilized people,
especially in our day, are neither elevated nor abased by the good
or bad fortune of a captain.  Their specific gravity in the human
species results from something more than a combat.  Their honor,
thank God! their dignity, their intelligence, their genius, are not
numbers which those gamblers, heroes and conquerors, can put in the
lottery of battles.  Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered. 
There is less glory and more liberty.  The drum holds its peace;
reason takes the word.  It is a game in which he who loses wins. 
Let us, therefore, speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides. 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance, and to God
that which is due to God.  What is Waterloo?  A victory?  No. The
winning number in the lottery.

The quine[11] won by Europe, paid by France.


[11] Five winning numbers in a lottery.


It was not worth while to place a lion there.

Waterloo, moreover, is the strangest encounter in history. 
Napoleon and Wellington.  They are not enemies; they are opposites. 
Never did God, who is fond of antitheses, make a more striking
contrast, a more extraordinary comparison.  On one side, precision,
foresight, geometry, prudence, an assured retreat, reserves spared,
with an obstinate coolness, an imperturbable method, strategy,
which takes advantage of the ground, tactics, which preserve the
equilibrium of battalions, carnage, executed according to rule,
war regulated, watch in hand, nothing voluntarily left to chance,
the ancient classic courage, absolute regularity; on the other,
intuition, divination, military oddity, superhuman instinct,
a flaming glance, an indescribable something which gazes like
an eagle, and which strikes like the lightning, a prodigious art
in disdainful impetuosity, all the mysteries of a profound soul,
associated with destiny; the stream, the plain, the forest,
the hill, summoned, and in a manner, forced to obey, the despot going
even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle; faith in a
star mingled with strategic science, elevating but perturbing it. 
Wellington was the Bareme of war; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo;
and on this occasion, genius was vanquished by calculation. 
On both sides some one was awaited.  It was the exact calculator
who succeeded.  Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy; he did not come. 
Wellington expected Blucher; he came.

Wellington is classic war taking its revenge.  Bonaparte, at his
dawning, had encountered him in Italy, and beaten him superbly. 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture.  The old tactics
had been not only struck as by lightning, but disgraced.  Who was
that Corsican of six and twenty?  What signified that splendid
ignoramus, who, with everything against him, nothing in his favor,
without provisions, without ammunition, without cannon, without shoes,
almost without an army, with a mere handful of men against masses,
hurled himself on Europe combined, and absurdly won victories
in the impossible?  Whence had issued that fulminating convict,
who almost without taking breath, and with the same set of combatants
in hand, pulverized, one after the other, the five armies of the emperor
of Germany, upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi, Wurmser on Beaulieu,
Melas on Wurmser, Mack on Melas?  Who was this novice in war
with the effrontery of a luminary?  The academical military school
excommunicated him, and as it lost its footing; hence, the implacable
rancor of the old Caesarism against the new; of the regular sword
against the flaming sword; and of the exchequer against genius. 
On the 18th of June, 1815, that rancor had the last word. 
and beneath Lodi, Montebello, Montenotte, Mantua, Arcola,
it wrote:  Waterloo.  A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet
to the majority.  Destiny consented to this irony.  In his decline,
Napoleon found Wurmser, the younger, again in front of him.

In fact, to get Wurmser, it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington.

Waterloo is a battle of the first order, won by a captain of the second.

That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo, is England;
the English firmness, the English resolution, the English blood;
the superb thing about England there, no offence to her, was herself. 
It was not her captain; it was her army.

Wellington, oddly ungrateful, declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst,
that his army, the army which fought on the 18th of June, 1815,
was a "detestable army."  What does that sombre intermingling
of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that?

England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington.  To make
Wellington so great is to belittle England.  Wellington is nothing
but a hero like many another.  Those Scotch Grays, those Horse Guards,
those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell, that infantry of Pack
and Kempt, that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset, those Highlanders
playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot, those battalions
of Rylandt, those utterly raw recruits, who hardly knew how to
handle a musket holding their own against Essling's and Rivoli's
old troops,--that is what was grand.  Wellington was tenacious;
in that lay his merit, and we are not seeking to lessen it: 
but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been
as solid as he.  The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke. 
As for us, all our glorification goes to the English soldier,
to the English army, to the English people.  If trophy there be,
it is to England that the trophy is due.  The column of Waterloo would
be more just, if, instead of the figure of a man, it bore on high
the statue of a people.

But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here. 
She still cherishes, after her own 1688 and our 1789,
the feudal illusion.  She believes in heredity and hierarchy. 
This people, surpassed by none in power and glory, regards itself
as a nation, and not as a people.  And as a people, it willingly
subordinates itself and takes a lord for its head.  As a workman,
it allows itself to be disdained; as a soldier, it allows itself
to be flogged.

It will be remembered, that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant
who had, it appears, saved the army, could not be mentioned
by Lord Paglan, as the English military hierarchy does not permit
any hero below the grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports.

That which we admire above all, in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo,
is the marvellous cleverness of chance.  A nocturnal rain, the wall
of Hougomont, the hollow road of Ohain, Grouchy deaf to the cannon,
Napoleon's guide deceiving him, Bulow's guide enlightening him,--
the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted.

On the whole, let us say it plainly, it was more of a massacre
than of a battle at Waterloo.

Of all pitched battles, Waterloo is the one which has the smallest
front for such a number of combatants.  Napoleon three-quarters
of a league; Wellington, half a league; seventy-two thousand
combatants on each side.  From this denseness the carnage arose.

The following calculation has been made, and the following
proportion established:  Loss of men:  at Austerlitz, French,
fourteen per cent; Russians, thirty per cent; Austrians,
forty-four per cent.  At Wagram, French, thirteen per cent;
Austrians, fourteen.  At the Moskowa, French, thirty-seven per cent;
Russians, forty-four. At Bautzen, French, thirteen per cent;
Russians and Prussians, fourteen.  At Waterloo, French, fifty-six
per cent; the Allies, thirty-one. Total for Waterloo, forty-one per
cent; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants; sixty thousand dead.

To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth,
the impassive support of man, and it resembles all plains.

At night, moreover, a sort of visionary mist arises from it;
and if a traveller strolls there, if he listens, if he watches, if he
dreams like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi, the hallucination
of the catastrophe takes possession of him.  The frightful 18th
of June lives again; the false monumental hillock disappears,
the lion vanishes in air, the battle-field resumes its reality,
lines of infantry undulate over the plain, furious gallops traverse
the horizon; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres,
the gleam of bayonets, the flare of bombs, the tremendous interchange
of thunders; he hears, as it were, the death rattle in the depths
of a tomb, the vague clamor of the battle phantom; those shadows
are grenadiers, those lights are cuirassiers; that skeleton Napoleon,
that other skeleton is Wellington; all this no longer exists,
and yet it clashes together and combats still; and the ravines
are empurpled, and the trees quiver, and there is fury even in the
clouds and in the shadows; all those terrible heights, Hougomont,
Mont-Saint-Jean, Frischemont, Papelotte, Plancenoit, appear confusedly
crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other.



CHAPTER XVII

IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD?


There exists a very respectable liberal school which
does not hate Waterloo.  We do not belong to it. 
To us, Waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty. 
That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly unexpected.

If one places one's self at the culminating point of view of the question,
Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory.  It is Europe
against France; it is Petersburg, Berlin, and Vienna against Paris;
it is the statu quo against the initiative; it is the 14th of July,
1789, attacked through the 20th of March, 1815; it is the monarchies
clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French rioting. 
The final extinction of that vast people which had been in eruption
for twenty-six years--such was the dream.  The solidarity of
the Brunswicks, the Nassaus, the Romanoffs, the Hohenzollerns,
the Hapsburgs with the Bourbons.  Waterloo bears divine right on
its crupper.  It is true, that the Empire having been despotic,
the kingdom by the natural reaction of things, was forced to be liberal,
and that a constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo,
to the great regret of the conquerors.  It is because revolution cannot
be really conquered, and that being providential and absolutely fatal,
it is always cropping up afresh:  before Waterloo, in Bonaparte
overthrowing the old thrones; after Waterloo, in Louis XVIII. 
granting and conforming to the charter.  Bonaparte places a postilion
on the throne of Naples, and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden,
employing inequality to demonstrate equality; Louis XVIII. 
at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights of man. 
If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is, call it Progress;
and if you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress,
call it To-morrow. To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly, and it is
already fulfilling it to-day. It always reaches its goal strangely. 
It employs Wellington to make of Foy, who was only a soldier,
an orator.  Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the tribune. 
Thus does progress proceed.  There is no such thing as a bad tool
for that workman.  It does not become disconcerted, but adjusts
to its divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps, and the
good old tottering invalid of Father Elysee.  It makes use of the
gouty man as well as of the conqueror; of the conqueror without,
of the gouty man within.  Waterloo, by cutting short the demolition
of European thrones by the sword, had no other effect than to cause
the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction. 
The slashers have finished; it was the turn of the thinkers. 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march. 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty.

In short, and incontestably, that which triumphed at Waterloo;
that which smiled in Wellington's rear; that which brought him all
the marshals' staffs of Europe, including, it is said, the staff
of a marshal of France; that which joyously trundled the barrows full
of bones to erect the knoll of the lion; that which triumphantly
inscribed on that pedestal the date "June 18, 1815"; that which
encouraged Blucher, as he put the flying army to the sword; that which,
from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, hovered over
France as over its prey, was the counter-revolution. It was the
counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word "dismemberment." 
On arriving in Paris, it beheld the crater close at hand; it felt
those ashes which scorched its feet, and it changed its mind;
it returned to the stammer of a charter.

Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo. 
Of intentional liberty there is none.  The counter-revolution was
involuntarily liberal, in the same manner as, by a corresponding
phenomenon, Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary.  On the 18th
of June, 1815, the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle.



CHAPTER XVIII

A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT


End of the dictatorship.  A whole European system crumbled away.

The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman
world as it expired.  Again we behold the abyss, as in the days
of the barbarians; only the barbarism of 1815, which must be called
by its pet name of the counter-revolution, was not long breathed,
soon fell to panting, and halted short.  The Empire was bewept,--
let us acknowledge the fact,--and bewept by heroic eyes. 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre, the Empire
had been glory in person.  It had diffused over the earth all the
light which tyranny can give a sombre light.  We will say more;
an obscure light.  Compared to the true daylight, it is night. 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse.

Louis XVIII.  re-entered Paris.  The circling dances of the 8th
of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March.  The Corsican
became the antithesis of the Bearnese.  The flag on the dome of the
Tuileries was white.  The exile reigned.  Hartwell's pine table took
its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV. 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken
place on the preceding day, Austerlitz having become antiquated. 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically.  One of the
most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth
century was established over France, and over the continent. 
Europe adopted the white cockade.  Trestaillon was celebrated. 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays
representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay.
Where there had been an Imperial Guard, there was now a red house. 
The Arc du Carrousel, all laden with badly borne victories,
thrown out of its element among these novelties, a little ashamed,
it may be, of Marengo and Arcola, extricated itself from its
predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme. The cemetery
of the Madeleine, a terrible pauper's grave in 1793, was covered
with jasper and marble, since the bones of Louis XVI.  and Marie
Antoinette lay in that dust.

In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth,
recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the
very month when Napoleon was crowned.  Pope Pius VII., who had
performed the coronation very near this death, tranquilly bestowed
his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation. 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow, aged four, whom it was
seditious to call the King of Rome.  And these things took place,
and the kings resumed their thrones, and the master of Europe
was put in a cage, and the old regime became the new regime,
and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place,
because, on the afternoon of a certain summer's day, a shepherd
said to a Prussian in the forest, "Go this way, and not that!"

This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April.  Ancient unhealthy
and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances. 
A lie wedded 1789; the right divine was masked under a charter;
fictions became constitutional; prejudices, superstitions and
mental reservations, with Article 14 in the heart, were varnished
over with liberalism.  It was the serpent's change of skin.

Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon. 
Under this reign of splendid matter, the ideal had received the
strange name of ideology!  It is a grave imprudence in a great man
to turn the future into derision.  The populace, however, that food
for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer, sought him with
its glance.  Where is he?  What is he doing?  "Napoleon is dead,"
said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo.  "He dead!"
cried the soldier; "you don't know him."  Imagination distrusted
this man, even when overthrown.  The depths of Europe were full
of darkness after Waterloo.  Something enormous remained long empty
through Napoleon's disappearance.

The kings placed themselves in this void.  Ancient Europe
profited by it to undertake reforms.  There was a Holy Alliance;
Belle-Alliance, Beautiful Alliance, the fatal field of Waterloo
had said in advance.

In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed,
the features of a new France were sketched out.  The future,
which the Emperor had rallied, made its entry.  On its brow it bore
the star, Liberty.  The glowing eyes of all young generations were
turned on it.  Singular fact! people were, at one and the same time,
in love with the future, Liberty, and the past, Napoleon.  Defeat had
rendered the vanquished greater.  Bonaparte fallen seemed more
lofty than Napoleon erect.  Those who had triumphed were alarmed. 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe, and France had him watched
by Montchenu.  His folded arms became a source of uneasiness
to thrones.  Alexander called him "my sleeplessness."  This terror
was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained
in him.  That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism. 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble.  The kings reigned,
but ill at their ease, with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon.

While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood,
the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo
were quietly rotting, and something of their peace was shed abroad
over the world.  The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815,
and Europe called this the Restoration.

This is what Waterloo was.

But what matters it to the Infinite? all that tempest, all that cloud,
that war, then that peace?  All that darkness did not trouble
for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub
skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle
soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame.



CHAPTER XIX

THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT


Let us return--it is a necessity in this book--to that fatal
battle-field.

On the 18th of June the moon was full.  Its light favored
Blucher's ferocious pursuit, betrayed the traces of the fugitives,
delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry,
and aided the massacre.  Such tragic favors of the night do occur
sometimes during catastrophes.

After the last cannon-shot had been fired, the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean
remained deserted.

The English occupied the encampment of the French; it is the
usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished. 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme.  The Prussians,
let loose on the retreating rout, pushed forward.  Wellington went
to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst.

If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable, it certainly is
to that village of Waterloo.  Waterloo took no part, and lay half
a league from the scene of action.  Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded,
Hougomont was burned, La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault,
Papelotte was burned, Plancenoit was burned, La Belle-Alliance beheld
the embrace of the two conquerors; these names are hardly known,
and Waterloo, which worked not in the battle, bears off all the honor.

We are not of the number of those who flatter war; when the occasion
presents itself, we tell the truth about it.  War has frightful
beauties which we have not concealed; it has also, we acknowledge,
some hideous features.  One of the most surprising is the prompt
stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory.  The dawn
which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses.

Who does this?  Who thus soils the triumph?  What hideous,
furtive hand is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory? 
What pickpockets are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory? 
Some philosophers--Voltaire among the number--affirm that it is
precisely those persons have made the glory.  It is the same men,
they say; there is no relief corps; those who are erect pillage
those who are prone on the earth.  The hero of the day is the
vampire of the night.  One has assuredly the right, after all,
to strip a corpse a bit when one is the author of that corpse. 
For our own part, we do not think so; it seems to us impossible
that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from a
dead man.

One thing is certain, which is, that generally after conquerors
follow thieves.  But let us leave the soldier, especially the
contemporary soldier, out of the question.

Every army has a rear-guard, and it is that which must be blamed. 
Bat-like creatures, half brigands and lackeys; all the sorts
of vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders; wearers
of uniforms, who take no part in the fighting; pretended invalids;
formidable limpers; interloping sutlers, trotting along in little carts,
sometimes accompanied by their wives, and stealing things which they
sell again; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers;
soldiers' servants; marauders; armies on the march in days gone by,--
we are not speaking of the present,--dragged all this behind them,
so that in the special language they are called "stragglers."  No army,
no nation, was responsible for those beings; they spoke Italian and
followed the Germans, then spoke French and followed the English. 
It was by one of these wretches, a Spanish straggler who spoke French,
that the Marquis of Fervacques, deceived by his Picard jargon,
and taking him for one of our own men, was traitorously slain
and robbed on the battle-field itself, in the course of the night
which followed the victory of Cerisoles.  The rascal sprang
from this marauding.  The detestable maxim, Live on the enemy!
produced this leprosy, which a strict discipline alone could heal. 
There are reputations which are deceptive; one does not always know why
certain generals, great in other directions, have been so popular. 
Turenne was adored by his soldiers because he tolerated pillage;
evil permitted constitutes part of goodness.  Turenne was so good that
he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and blood. 
The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in number,
according as the chief was more or less severe.  Hoche and Marceau
had no stragglers; Wellington had few, and we do him the justice to
mention it.

Nevertheless, on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June,
the dead were robbed.  Wellington was rigid; he gave orders that any
one caught in the act should be shot; but rapine is tenacious. 
The marauders stole in one corner of the battlefield while others
were being shot in another.

The moon was sinister over this plain.

Towards midnight, a man was prowling about, or rather, climbing in
the direction of the hollow road of Ohain.  To all appearance he
was one of those whom we have just described,--neither English
nor French, neither peasant nor soldier, less a man than a ghoul
attracted by the scent of the dead bodies having theft for
his victory, and come to rifle Waterloo.  He was clad in a blouse
that was something like a great coat; he was uneasy and audacious;
he walked forwards and gazed behind him.  Who was this man? 
The night probably knew more of him than the day.  He had no sack,
but evidently he had large pockets under his coat.  From time to
time he halted, scrutinized the plain around him as though to see
whether he were observed, bent over abruptly, disturbed something
silent and motionless on the ground, then rose and fled. 
His sliding motion, his attitudes, his mysterious and rapid gestures,
caused him to resemble those twilight larvae which haunt ruins,
and which ancient Norman legends call the Alleurs.

Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among
the marshes.

A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have
perceived at some distance a sort of little sutler's wagon
with a fluted wicker hood, harnessed to a famished nag which was
cropping the grass across its bit as it halted, hidden, as it were,
behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to Nivelles,
at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l'Alleud;
and in the wagon, a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages. 
Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and that prowler.

The darkness was serene.  Not a cloud in the zenith.  What matters it
if the earth be red! the moon remains white; these are the indifferences
of the sky.  In the fields, branches of trees broken by grape-shot,
but not fallen, upheld by their bark, swayed gently in the breeze
of night.  A breath, almost a respiration, moved the shrubbery. 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass.

In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general
rounds of the English camp were audible.

Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn, forming, one in
the west, the other in the east, two great flames which were joined
by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English, like a necklace
of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities, as they extended
in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon.

We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain.  The heart
is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been
to so many brave men.

If there is anything terrible, if there exists a reality which
surpasses dreams, it is this:  to live, to see the sun; to be in full
possession of virile force; to possess health and joy; to laugh valiantly;
to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one;
to feel in one's breast lungs which breathe, a heart which beats,
a will which reasons; to speak, think, hope, love; to have a mother,
to have a wife, to have children; to have the light--and all at once,
in the space of a shout, in less than a minute, to sink into an abyss;
to fall, to roll, to crush, to be crushed; to see ears of wheat,
flowers, leaves, branches; not to be able to catch hold of anything;
to feel one's sword useless, men beneath one, horses on top of one;
to struggle in vain, since one's bones have been broken by some
kick in the darkness; to feel a heel which makes one's eyes start
from their sockets; to bite horses' shoes in one's rage; to stifle,
to yell, to writhe; to be beneath, and to say to one's self,
"But just a little while ago I was a living man!"

There, where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle,
all was silence now.  The edges of the hollow road were encumbered
with horses and riders, inextricably heaped up.  Terrible entanglement! 
There was no longer any slope, for the corpses had levelled the road
with the plain, and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel
of barley.  A heap of dead bodies in the upper part, a river of
blood in the lower part--such was that road on the evening of the
18th of June, 1815.  The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway,
and there overflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis
of trees which barred the way, at a spot which is still pointed out.

It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point,
in the direction of the Genappe road, that the destruction
of the cuirassiers had taken place.  The thickness of the layer
of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow road. 
Towards the middle, at the point where it became level,
where Delort's division had passed, the layer of corpses was thinner.

The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader
was going in that direction.  He was searching that vast tomb. 
He gazed about.  He passed the dead in some sort of hideous review. 
He walked with his feet in the blood.

All at once he paused.

A few paces in front of him, in the hollow road, at the point
where the pile of dead came to an end, an open hand, illumined by
the moon, projected from beneath that heap of men.  That hand
had on its finger something sparkling, which was a ring of gold.

The man bent over, remained in a crouching attitude for a moment,
and when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand.

He did not precisely rise; he remained in a stooping and
frightened attitude, with his back turned to the heap of dead,
scanning the horizon on his knees, with the whole upper portion
of his body supported on his two forefingers, which rested on
the earth, and his head peering above the edge of the hollow road. 
The jackal's four paws suit some actions.

Then coming to a decision, he rose to his feet.

At that moment, he gave a terrible start.  He felt some one clutch
him from behind.

He wheeled round; it was the open hand, which had closed, and had
seized the skirt of his coat.

An honest man would have been terrified; this man burst into a laugh.

"Come," said he, "it's only a dead body.  I prefer a spook
to a gendarme."

But the hand weakened and released him.  Effort is quickly exhausted
in the grave.

"Well now," said the prowler, "is that dead fellow alive? 
Let's see."

He bent down again, fumbled among the heap, pushed aside everything
that was in his way, seized the hand, grasped the arm, freed the head,
pulled out the body, and a few moments later he was dragging
the lifeless, or at least the unconscious, man, through the shadows
of hollow road.  He was a cuirassier, an officer, and even an officer
of considerable rank; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath
the cuirass; this officer no longer possessed a helmet.  A furious
sword-cut had scarred his face, where nothing was discernible but blood.

However, he did not appear to have any broken limbs, and, by some
happy chance, if that word is permissible here, the dead had been vaulted
above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed. 
His eyes were still closed.

On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor.

The prowler tore off this cross, which disappeared into one
of the gulfs which he had beneath his great coat.

Then he felt of the officer's fob, discovered a watch there,
and took possession of it.  Next he searched his waistcoat,
found a purse and pocketed it.

When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering
to this dying man, the officer opened his eyes.

"Thanks," he said feebly.

The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him,
the freshness of the night, the air which he could inhale freely,
had roused him from his lethargy.

The prowler made no reply.  He raised his head.  A sound of footsteps
was audible in the plain; some patrol was probably approaching.

The officer murmured, for the death agony was still in his voice:--

"Who won the battle?"

"The English," answered the prowler.

The officer went on:--

"Look in my pockets; you will find a watch and a purse.  Take them."

It was already done.

The prowler executed the required feint, and said:--

"There is nothing there."

"I have been robbed," said the officer; "I am sorry for that. 
You should have had them."

The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct.

"Some one is coming," said the prowler, with the movement of a man
who is taking his departure.

The officer raised his arm feebly, and detained him.

"You have saved my life.  Who are you?"

The prowler answered rapidly, and in a low voice:--

"Like yourself, I belonged to the French army.  I must leave you. 
If they were to catch me, they would shoot me.  I have saved your life. 
Now get out of the scrape yourself."

"What is your rank?"

"Sergeant."

"What is your name?"

"Thenardier."

"I shall not forget that name," said the officer; "and do you
remember mine.  My name is Pontmercy."



BOOK SECOND.--THE SHIP ORION



CHAPTER I

NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430


Jean Valjean had been recaptured.

The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over
the sad details.  We will confine ourselves to transcribing
two paragraphs published by the journals of that day, a few
months after the surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M.

These articles are rather summary.  It must be remembered, that at
that epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence.

We borrow the first from the Drapeau Blanc.  It bears the date
of July 25, 1823.


An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the
theatre of an event quite out of the ordinary course.  A man,
who was a stranger in the Department, and who bore the name of
M. Madeleine, had, thanks to the new methods, resuscitated some
years ago an ancient local industry, the manufacture of jet and of
black glass trinkets.  He had made his fortune in the business,
and that of the arrondissement as well, we will admit.  He had been
appointed mayor, in recognition of his services.  The police discovered
that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had broken
his ban, condemned in 1796 for theft, and named Jean Valjean. 
Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison.  It appears that previous
to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of
M. Laffitte, a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there,
and which he had, moreover, and by perfectly legitimate means,
acquired in his business.  No one has been able to discover where Jean
Valjean has concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon.


The second article, which enters a little more into detail,
is an extract from the Journal de Paris, of the same date. 
A former convict, who had been liberated, named Jean Valjean,
has just appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var,
under circumstances calculated to attract attention.  This wretch
had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the police, he had changed
his name, and had succeeded in getting himself appointed mayor
of one of our small northern towns; in this town he had established
a considerable commerce.  He has at last been unmasked and arrested,
thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor. 
He had for his concubine a woman of the town, who died of a shock
at the moment of his arrest.  This scoundrel, who is endowed with
Herculean strength, found means to escape; but three or four days
after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more,
in Paris itself, at the very moment when he was entering one of
those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village
of Montfermeil (Seine-et-Oise). He is said to have profited
by this interval of three or four days of liberty, to withdraw a
considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers. 
This sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs. 
If the indictment is to be trusted, he has hidden it in some place
known to himself alone, and it has not been possible to lay hands
on it.  However that may be, the said Jean Valjean has just been
brought before the Assizes of the Department of the Var as accused
of highway robbery accompanied with violence, about eight years ago,
on the person of one of those honest children who, as the patriarch
of Ferney has said, in immortal verse,


          ". . . Arrive from Savoy every year,
           And who, with gentle hands, do clear
           Those long canals choked up with soot."


This bandit refused to defend himself.  It was proved by the
skilful and eloquent representative of the public prosecutor,
that the theft was committed in complicity with others, and that
Jean Valjean was a member of a band of robbers in the south. 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to the death
penalty in consequence.  This criminal refused to lodge an appeal. 
The king, in his inexhaustible clemency, has deigned to commute
his penalty to that of penal servitude for life.  Jean Valjean was
immediately taken to the prison at Toulon.


The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious
habits at M. sur M. Some papers, among others the Constitutional,
presented this commutation as a triumph of the priestly party.

Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys.  He was called 9,430.

However, and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be
obliged to recur to the subject, the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished
with M. Madeleine; all that he had foreseen during his night
of fever and hesitation was realized; lacking him, there actually
was a soul lacking.  After this fall, there took place at M. sur
M. that egotistical division of great existences which have fallen,
that fatal dismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished
every day, obscurely, in the human community, and which history has
noted only once, because it occurred after the death of Alexander. 
Lieutenants are crowned kings; superintendents improvise manufacturers
out of themselves.  Envious rivalries arose.  M. Madeleine's vast
workshops were shut; his buildings fell to ruin, his workmen
were scattered.  Some of them quitted the country, others abandoned
the trade.  Thenceforth, everything was done on a small scale,
instead of on a grand scale; for lucre instead of the general good. 
There was no longer a centre; everywhere there was competition
and animosity.  M. Madeleine had reigned over all and directed all. 
No sooner had he fallen, than each pulled things to himself;
the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit of organization,
bitterness to cordiality, hatred of one another to the benevolence
of the founder towards all; the threads which M. Madeleine had set
were tangled and broken, the methods were adulterated, the products
were debased, confidence was killed; the market diminished,
for lack of orders; salaries were reduced, the workshops stood still,
bankruptcy arrived.  And then there was nothing more for the poor. 
All had vanished.

The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere. 
Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes
establishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine,
for the benefit of the galleys, the cost of collecting taxes had
doubled in the arrondissement of M. sur M.; and M. de Villele called
attention to the fact in the rostrum, in the month of February, 1827.



CHAPTER II


IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES, WHICH ARE OF THE
DEVIL'S COMPOSITION, POSSIBLY


Before proceeding further, it will be to the purpose to narrate
in some detail, a singular occurrence which took place at about the
same epoch, in Montfermeil, and which is not lacking in coincidence
with certain conjectures of the indictment.

There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition,
which is all the more curious and all the more precious, because a popular
superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in Siberia. 
We are among those who respect everything which is in the nature
of a rare plant.  Here, then, is the superstition of Montfermeil: 
it is thought that the devil, from time immemorial, has selected
the forest as a hiding-place for his treasures.  Goodwives affirm
that it is no rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded nooks
of the forest, a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper,
wearing wooden shoes, clad in trousers and a blouse of linen,
and recognizable by the fact, that, instead of a cap or hat,
he has two immense horns on his head.  This ought, in fact, to render
him recognizable.  This man is habitually engaged in digging a hole. 
There are three ways of profiting by such an encounter.  The first is
to approach the man and speak to him.  Then it is seen that the man
is simply a peasant, that he appears black because it is nightfall;
that he is not digging any hole whatever, but is cutting grass
for his cows, and that what had been taken for horns is nothing
but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his back, and whose teeth,
thanks to the perspective of evening, seemed to spring from his head. 
The man returns home and dies within the week.  The second way is
to watch him, to wait until he has dug his hole, until he has filled
it and has gone away; then to run with great speed to the trench,
to open it once more and to seize the "treasure" which the black
man has necessarily placed there.  In this case one dies within
the month.  Finally, the last method is not to speak to the black man,
not to look at him, and to flee at the best speed of one's legs. 
One then dies within the year.

As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences,
the second, which at all events, presents some advantages,
among others that of possessing a treasure, if only for a month,
is the one most generally adopted.  So bold men, who are tempted
by every chance, have quite frequently, as we are assured, opened the
holes excavated by the black man, and tried to rob the devil. 
The success of the operation appears to be but moderate.  At least,
if the tradition is to be believed, and in particular the two
enigmatical lines in barbarous Latin, which an evil Norman monk,
a bit of a sorcerer, named Tryphon has left on this subject. 
This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of Saint-Georges de Bocherville,
near Rouen, and toads spawn on his grave.

Accordingly, enormous efforts are made.  Such trenches are
ordinarily extremely deep; a man sweats, digs, toils all night--
for it must be done at night; he wets his shirt, burns out his candle,
breaks his mattock, and when he arrives at the bottom of the hole,
when he lays his hand on the "treasure," what does he find? 
What is the devil's treasure?  A sou, sometimes a crown-piece,
a stone, a skeleton, a bleeding body, sometimes a spectre folded
in four like a sheet of paper in a portfolio, sometimes nothing. 
This is what Tryphon's verses seem to announce to the indiscreet
and curious:--

          "Fodit, et in fossa thesauros condit opaca,
           As, nummas, lapides, cadaver, simulacra, nihilque."


It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn
with bullets, sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn,
which has evidently served the devil.  Tryphon does not record
these two finds, since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century,
and since the devil does not appear to have had the wit to invent
powder before Roger Bacon's time, and cards before the time of Charles VI.

Moreover, if one plays at cards, one is sure to lose all that
one possesses! and as for the powder in the horn, it possesses
the property of making your gun burst in your face.

Now, a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the prosecuting
attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his flight
of several days had been prowling around Montfermeil, it was remarked
in that village that a certain old road-laborer, named Boulatruelle,
had "peculiar ways" in the forest.  People thereabouts thought
they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in the galleys. 
He was subjected to certain police supervision, and, as he could
find work nowhere, the administration employed him at reduced
rates as a road-mender on the cross-road from Gagny to Lagny.

This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by the
inhabitants of the district as too respectful, too humble, too prompt
in removing his cap to every one, and trembling and smiling in the
presence of the gendarmes,--probably affiliated to robber bands,
they said; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall. 
The only thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard.

This is what people thought they had noticed:--

Of late, Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breaking
and care of the road at a very early hour, and to betaking himself
to the forest with his pickaxe.  He was encountered towards
evening in the most deserted clearings, in the wildest thickets;
and he had the appearance of being in search of something,
and sometimes he was digging holes.  The goodwives who passed took
him at first for Beelzebub; then they recognized Boulatruelle,
and were not in the least reassured thereby.  These encounters seemed
to cause Boulatruelle a lively displeasure.  It was evident that he
sought to hide, and that there was some mystery in what he was doing.

It was said in the village:  "It is clear that the devil has appeared. 
Boulatruelle has seen him, and is on the search.  In sooth, he is
cunning enough to pocket Lucifer's hoard."

The Voltairians added, "Will Boulatruelle catch the devil,
or will the devil catch Boulatruelle?"  The old women made a great
many signs of the cross.

In the meantime, Boulatruelle's manoeuvres in the forest ceased;
and he resumed his regular occupation of roadmending; and people
gossiped of something else.

Some persons, however, were still curious, surmising that in all
this there was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends,
but some fine windfall of a more serious and palpable sort than
the devil's bank-bills, and that the road-mender had half discovered
the secret.  The most "puzzled" were the school-master and Thenardier,
the proprietor of the tavern, who was everybody's friend,
and had not disdained to ally himself with Boulatruelle.

"He has been in the galleys," said Thenardier.  "Eh!  Good God!
no one knows who has been there or will be there."

One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law
would have instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in
the forest, and that the latter would have been forced to speak,
and that he would have been put to the torture in case of need,
and that Boulatruelle would not have resisted the water test,
for example.  "Let us put him to the wine test," said Thenardier.

They made an effort, and got the old road-mender to drinking. 
Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount, but said very little. 
He combined with admirable art, and in masterly proportions,
the thirst of a gormandizer with the discretion of a judge. 
Nevertheless, by dint of returning to the charge and of comparing
and putting together the few obscure words which he did allow to
escape him, this is what Thenardier and the schoolmaster imagined
that they had made out:--

One morning, when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work, at daybreak,
he had been surprised to see, at a nook of the forest in the underbrush,
a shovel and a pickaxe, concealed, as one might say.

However, he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel
and pick of Father Six-Fours, the water-carrier, and would have
thought no more about it.  But, on the evening of that day, he saw,
without being seen himself, as he was hidden by a large tree,
"a person who did not belong in those parts, and whom he, Boulatruelle,
knew well," directing his steps towards the densest part of
the wood.  Translation by Thenardier:  A comrade of the galleys. 
Boulatruelle obstinately refused to reveal his name.  This person
carried a package--something square, like a large box or a small trunk. 
Surprise on the part of Boulatruelle.  However, it was only
after the expiration of seven or eight minutes that the idea of
following that "person" had occurred to him.  But it was too late;
the person was already in the thicket, night had descended,
and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him.  Then he
had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of the woods. 
"It was moonlight."  Two or three hours later, Boulatruelle had seen
this person emerge from the brushwood, carrying no longer the coffer,
but a shovel and pick.  Boulatruelle had allowed the person to pass,
and had not dreamed of accosting him, because he said to himself
that the other man was three times as strong as he was, and armed
with a pickaxe, and that he would probably knock him over the head
on recognizing him, and on perceiving that he was recognized. 
Touching effusion of two old comrades on meeting again.  But the
shovel and pick had served as a ray of light to Boulatruelle; he had
hastened to the thicket in the morning, and had found neither shovel
nor pick.  From this he had drawn the inference that this person,
once in the forest, had dug a hole with his pick, buried the coffer,
and reclosed the hole with his shovel.  Now, the coffer was too small
to contain a body; therefore it contained money.  Hence his researches. 
Boulatruelle had explored, sounded, searched the entire forest
and the thicket, and had dug wherever the earth appeared to him
to have been recently turned up.  In vain.

He had "ferreted out" nothing.  No one in Montfermeil thought
any more about it.  There were only a few brave gossips, who said,
"You may be certain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take
all that trouble for nothing; he was sure that the devil had come."



CHAPTER III

THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY MANIPULATION
TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER


Towards the end of October, in that same year, 1823, the inhabitants
of Toulon beheld the entry into their port, after heavy weather,
and for the purpose of repairing some damages, of the ship Orion,
which was employed later at Brest as a school-ship, and which then
formed a part of the Mediterranean squadron.

This vessel, battered as it was,--for the sea had handled it roughly,--
produced a fine effect as it entered the roads.  It flew some
colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns,
which it returned, shot for shot; total, twenty-two. It has been
calculated that what with salvos, royal and military politenesses,
courteous exchanges of uproar, signals of etiquette, formalities of
roadsteads and citadels, sunrises and sunsets, saluted every day
by all fortresses and all ships of war, openings and closings
of ports, etc., the civilized world, discharged all over the earth,
in the course of four and twenty hours, one hundred and fifty
thousand useless shots.  At six francs the shot, that comes to nine
hundred thousand francs a day, three hundred millions a year,
which vanish in smoke.  This is a mere detail.  All this time the
poor were dying of hunger.

The year 1823 was what the Restoration called "the epoch of the
Spanish war."

This war contained many events in one, and a quantity of peculiarities. 
A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon; the branch of France
succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid, that is to say,
performing an act devolving on the elder; an apparent return to our
national traditions, complicated by servitude and by subjection to the
cabinets of the North; M. le Duc d'Angouleme, surnamed by the liberal
sheets the hero of Andujar, compressing in a triumphal attitude
that was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air, the ancient
and very powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the
chimerical terrorism of the liberals; the sansculottes resuscitated,
to the great terror of dowagers, under the name of descamisados;
monarchy opposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy;
the theories of '89 roughly interrupted in the sap; a European halt,
called to the French idea, which was making the tour of the world;
beside the son of France as generalissimo, the Prince de Carignan,
afterwards Charles Albert, enrolling himself in that crusade of kings
against people as a volunteer, with grenadier epaulets of red worsted;
the soldiers of the Empire setting out on a fresh campaign, but aged,
saddened, after eight years of repose, and under the white cockade;
the tricolored standard waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen,
as the white standard had been thirty years earlier at Coblentz;
monks mingled with our troops; the spirit of liberty and of novelty
brought to its senses by bayonets; principles slaughtered by cannonades;
France undoing by her arms that which she had done by her mind;
in addition to this, hostile leaders sold, soldiers hesitating,
cities besieged by millions; no military perils, and yet possible
explosions, as in every mine which is surprised and invaded;
but little bloodshed, little honor won, shame for some, glory for no one. 
Such was this war, made by the princes descended from Louis XIV.,
and conducted by generals who had been under Napoleon.  Its sad fate
was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics.

Some feats of arms were serious; the taking of the Trocadero,
among others, was a fine military action; but after all, we repeat,
the trumpets of this war give back a cracked sound, the whole
effect was suspicious; history approves of France for making a
difficulty about accepting this false triumph.  It seemed evident
that certain Spanish officers charged with resistance yielded
too easily; the idea of corruption was connected with the victory;
it appears as though generals and not battles had been won,
and the conquering soldier returned humiliated.  A debasing war,
in short, in which the Bank of France could be read in the folds
of the flag.

Soldiers of the war of 1808, on whom Saragossa had fallen in
formidable ruin, frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels,
and began to regret Palafox.  It is the nature of France to prefer
to have Rostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her.

From a still more serious point of view, and one which it is also
proper to insist upon here, this war, which wounded the military
spirit of France, enraged the democratic spirit.  It was an enterprise
of inthralment.  In that campaign, the object of the French soldier,
the son of democracy, was the conquest of a yoke for others. 
A hideous contradiction.  France is made to arouse the soul of nations,
not to stifle it.  All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are
the French Revolution:  liberty darts rays from France.  That is a
solar fact.  Blind is he who will not see!  It was Bonaparte who said it.

The war of 1823, an outrage on the generous Spanish nation,
was then, at the same time, an outrage on the French Revolution. 
It was France who committed this monstrous violence; by foul means,
for, with the exception of wars of liberation, everything that armies
do is by foul means.  The words passive obedience indicate this. 
An army is a strange masterpiece of combination where force results
from an enormous sum of impotence.  Thus is war, made by humanity
against humanity, despite humanity, explained.

As for the Bourbons, the war of 1823 was fatal to them.  They took it
for a success.  They did not perceive the danger that lies in having
an idea slain to order.  They went astray, in their innocence,
to such a degree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a
crime into their establishment as an element of strength.  The spirit
of the ambush entered into their politics.  1830 had its germ in 1823. 
The Spanish campaign became in their counsels an argument for force
and for adventures by right Divine.  France, having re-established
elrey netto in Spain, might well have re-established the absolute king
at home.  They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience
of the soldier for the consent of the nation.  Such confidence
is the ruin of thrones.  It is not permitted to fall asleep,
either in the shadow of a machineel tree, nor in the shadow of an army.

Let us return to the ship Orion.

During the operations of the army commanded by the prince generalissimo,
a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean.  We have just
stated that the Orion belonged to this fleet, and that accidents
of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon.

The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it
which attracts and engages a crowd.  It is because it is great,
and the crowd loves what is great.

A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations
of the genius of man with the powers of nature.

A ship of the line is composed, at the same time, of the heaviest
and the lightest of possible matter, for it deals at one and the same
time with three forms of substance,--solid, liquid, and fluid,--
and it must do battle with all three.  It has eleven claws of
iron with which to seize the granite on the bottom of the sea,
and more wings and more antennae than winged insects, to catch
the wind in the clouds.  Its breath pours out through its hundred
and twenty cannons as through enormous trumpets, and replies
proudly to the thunder.  The ocean seeks to lead it astray in the
alarming sameness of its billows, but the vessel has its soul,
its compass, which counsels it and always shows it the north. 
In the blackest nights, its lanterns supply the place of the stars. 
Thus, against the wind, it has its cordage and its canvas;
against the water, wood; against the rocks, its iron, brass, and lead;
against the shadows, its light; against immensity, a needle.

If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which,
taken as a whole, constitute the ship of the line, one has only to
enter one of the six-story covered construction stocks, in the ports
of Brest or Toulon.  The vessels in process of construction are
under a bell-glass there, as it were.  This colossal beam is a yard;
that great column of wood which stretches out on the earth as far
as the eye can reach is the main-mast. Taking it from its root
in the stocks to its tip in the clouds, it is sixty fathoms long,
and its diameter at its base is three feet.  The English main-mast rises
to a height of two hundred and seventeen feet above the water-line.
The navy of our fathers employed cables, ours employs chains. 
The simple pile of chains on a ship of a hundred guns is four feet high,
twenty feet in breadth, and eight feet in depth.  And how much
wood is required to make this ship?  Three thousand cubic metres. 
It is a floating forest.

And moreover, let this be borne in mind, it is only a question
here of the military vessel of forty years ago, of the simple
sailing-vessel; steam, then in its infancy, has since added
new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war vessel. 
At the present time, for example, the mixed vessel with a screw
is a surprising machine, propelled by three thousand square
metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power.

Not to mention these new marvels, the ancient vessel of Christopher
Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man. 
It is as inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales;
it stores up the wind in its sails, it is precise in the immense
vagueness of the billows, it floats, and it reigns.

There comes an hour, nevertheless, when the gale breaks that sixty-foot
yard like a straw, when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall,
when that anchor, which weighs tens of thousands, is twisted in the
jaws of the waves like a fisherman's hook in the jaws of a pike,
when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars,
which the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night,
when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power
and majesty which are superior.

Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate
in an immense feebleness it affords men food for thought,
Hence in the ports curious people abound around these marvellous
machines of war and of navigation, without being able to explain
perfectly to themselves why.  Every day, accordingly, from morning
until night, the quays, sluices, and the jetties of the port
of Toulon were covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers,
as they say in Paris, whose business consisted in staring at the Orion.

The Orion was a ship that had been ailing for a long time;
in the course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles
had collected on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half
its speed; it had gone into the dry dock the year before this,
in order to have the barnacles scraped off, then it had put to
sea again; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel: 
in the neighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been
strained and had opened; and, as the plating in those days was not
of sheet iron, the vessel had sprung a leak.  A violent equinoctial
gale had come up, which had first staved in a grating and a porthole
on the larboard side, and damaged the foretop-gallant-shrouds;
in consequence of these injuries, the Orion had run back to Toulon.

It anchored near the Arsenal; it was fully equipped, and repairs
were begun.  The hull had received no damage on the starboard,
but some of the planks had been unnailed here and there,
according to custom, to permit of air entering the hold.

One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident.

The crew was busy bending the sails; the topman, who had to
take the upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard,
lost his balance; he was seen to waver; the multitude thronging
the Arsenal quay uttered a cry; the man's head overbalanced his body;
the man fell around the yard, with his hands outstretched towards
the abyss; on his way he seized the footrope, first with one hand,
then with the other, and remained hanging from it:  the sea lay
below him at a dizzy depth; the shock of his fall had imparted
to the foot-rope a violent swinging motion; the man swayed back
and forth at the end of that rope, like a stone in a sling.

It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance; not one of
the sailors, all fishermen of the coast, recently levied for the service,
dared to attempt it.  In the meantime, the unfortunate topman was
losing his strength; his anguish could not be discerned on his face,
but his exhaustion was visible in every limb; his arms were contracted
in horrible twitchings; every effort which he made to re-ascend served
but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope; he did not shout,
for fear of exhausting his strength.  All were awaiting the minute
when he should release his hold on the rope, and, from instant
to instant, heads were turned aside that his fall might not be seen. 
There are moments when a bit of rope, a pole, the branch of a tree,
is life itself, and it is a terrible thing to see a living being
detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit.

All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility
of a tiger-cat; this man was dressed in red; he was a convict;
he wore a green cap; he was a life convict.  On arriving on a level
with the top, a gust of wind carried away his cap, and allowed
a perfectly white head to be seen:  he was not a young man.

A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had,
in fact, at the very first instant, hastened to the officer of
the watch, and, in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation
of the crew, while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back,
he had asked the officer's permission to risk his life to save
the topman; at an affirmative sign from the officer he had
broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer,
then he had caught up a rope, and had dashed into the rigging: 
no one noticed, at the instant, with what ease that chain had
been broken; it was only later on that the incident was recalled.

In a twinkling he was on the yard; he paused for a few seconds
and appeared to be measuring it with his eye; these seconds,
during which the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity
of a thread, seemed centuries to those who were looking on. 
At last, the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a step: 
the crowd drew a long breath.  He was seen to run out along the yard: 
on arriving at the point, he fastened the rope which he had brought
to it, and allowed the other end to hang down, then he began
to descend the rope, hand over hand, and then,--and the anguish
was indescribable,--instead of one man suspended over the gulf,
there were two.

One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly,
only here the spider brought life, not death.  Ten thousand glances
were fastened on this group; not a cry, not a word; the same tremor
contracted every brow; all mouths held their breath as though they
feared to add the slightest puff to the wind which was swaying
the two unfortunate men.

In the meantime, the convict had succeeded in lowering himself
to a position near the sailor.  It was high time; one minute more,
and the exhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself
to fall into the abyss.  The convict had moored him securely with
the cord to which he clung with one hand, while he was working
with the other.  At last, he was seen to climb back on the yard,
and to drag the sailor up after him; he held him there a moment
to allow him to recover his strength, then he grasped him in his
arms and carried him, walking on the yard himself to the cap,
and from there to the main-top, where he left him in the hands
of his comrades.

At that moment the crowd broke into applause:  old convict-sergeants
among them wept, and women embraced each other on the quay,
and all voices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage,
"Pardon for that man!"

He, in the meantime, had immediately begun to make his descent
to rejoin his detachment.  In order to reach them the more speedily,
he dropped into the rigging, and ran along one of the lower yards;
all eyes were following him.  At a certain moment fear assailed them;
whether it was that he was fatigued, or that his head turned,
they thought they saw him hesitate and stagger.  All at once the crowd
uttered a loud shout:  the convict had fallen into the sea.

The fall was perilous.  The frigate Algesiras was anchored alongside
the Orion, and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels: 
it was to be feared that he would slip under one or the other of them. 
Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat; the crowd cheered
them on; anxiety again took possession of all souls; the man had not
risen to the surface; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving
a ripple, as though he had fallen into a cask of oil:  they sounded,
they dived.  In vain.  The search was continued until the evening: 
they did not even find the body.

On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines:--

"Nov. 17, 1823.  Yesterday, a convict belonging to the detachment on
board of the Orion, on his return from rendering assistance to a sailor,
fell into the sea and was drowned.  The body has not yet been found; it is
supposed that it is entangled among the piles of the Arsenal point:  this
man was committed under the number 9,430, and his name was Jean Valjean."



BOOK THIRD.--ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROMISE MADE TO THE DEAD WOMAN



CHAPTER I

THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL


Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles, on the southern edge
of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne. 
At the present day it is a tolerably large town, ornamented all the year
through with plaster villas, and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois. 
In 1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor
so many well-satisfied citizens:  it was only a village in the forest. 
Some pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there,
to be sure, which were recognizable by their grand air, their balconies
in twisted iron, and their long windows, whose tiny panes cast all
sorts of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters;
but Montfermeil was none the less a village.  Retired cloth-merchants
and rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet; it was a
peaceful and charming place, which was not on the road to anywhere: 
there people lived, and cheaply, that peasant rustic life which is
so bounteous and so easy; only, water was rare there, on account
of the elevation of the plateau.

It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance;
the end of the village towards Gagny drew its water from the
magnificent ponds which exist in the woods there.  The other end,
which surrounds the church and which lies in the direction of Chelles,
found drinking-water only at a little spring half-way down the slope,
near the road to Chelles, about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil.

Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water. 
The large houses, the aristocracy, of which the Thenardier tavern
formed a part, paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a
business of it, and who earned about eight sous a day in his enterprise
of supplying Montfermeil with water; but this good man only worked
until seven o'clock in the evening in summer, and five in winter;
and night once come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed,
he who had no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did
without it.

This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader
has probably not forgotten,--little Cosette.  It will be remembered
that Cosette was useful to the Thenardiers in two ways: 
they made the mother pay them, and they made the child serve them. 
So when the mother ceased to pay altogether, the reason for which we
have read in preceding chapters, the Thenardiers kept Cosette. 
She took the place of a servant in their house.  In this capacity she
it was who ran to fetch water when it was required.  So the child,
who was greatly terrified at the idea of going to the spring at night,
took great care that water should never be lacking in the house.

Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil. 
The beginning of the winter had been mild; there had been neither snow
nor frost up to that time.  Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained
permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street
of the village, and a band of itinerant merchants, under protection
of the same tolerance, had constructed their stalls on the Church Square,
and even extended them into Boulanger Alley, where, as the reader
will perhaps remember, the Thenardiers' hostelry was situated. 
These people filled the inns and drinking-shops, and communicated
to that tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life.  In order
to play the part of a faithful historian, we ought even to add that,
among the curiosities displayed in the square, there was a menagerie,
in which frightful clowns, clad in rags and coming no one knew whence,
exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those
horrible Brazilian vultures, such as our Royal Museum did not
possess until 1845, and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye. 
I believe that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus;
it belongs to the order of the Apicides, and to the family of
the vultures.  Some good old Bonapartist soldiers, who had retired
to the village, went to see this creature with great devotion. 
The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a unique
phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie.

On Christmas eve itself, a number of men, carters, and peddlers,
were seated at table, drinking and smoking around four or five
candles in the public room of Thenardier's hostelry.  This room
resembled all drinking-shop rooms,--tables, pewter jugs, bottles,
drinkers, smokers; but little light and a great deal of noise. 
The date of the year 1823 was indicated, nevertheless, by two
objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class:  to wit,
a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin.  The female Thenardier was
attending to the supper, which was roasting in front of a clear fire;
her husband was drinking with his customers and talking politics.

Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects
the Spanish war and M. le Duc d'Angouleme, strictly local parentheses,
like the following, were audible amid the uproar:--

"About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly. 
When ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve. 
They have yielded a great deal of juice under the press." 
"But the grapes cannot be ripe?"  "In those parts the grapes
should not be ripe; the wine turns oily as soon as spring comes." 
"Then it is very thin wine?"  "There are wines poorer even than these. 
The grapes must be gathered while green."  Etc.

Or a miller would call out:--

"Are we responsible for what is in the sacks?  We find in them
a quantity of small seed which we cannot sift out, and which we
are obliged to send through the mill-stones; there are tares,
fennel, vetches, hempseed, fox-tail, and a host of other weeds,
not to mention pebbles, which abound in certain wheat, especially in
Breton wheat.  I am not fond of grinding Breton wheat, any more than
long-sawyers like to saw beams with nails in them.  You can judge
of the bad dust that makes in grinding.  And then people complain
of the flour.  They are in the wrong.  The flour is no fault of ours."

In a space between two windows a mower, who was seated at table
with a landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow
work to be performed in the spring, was saying:--

"It does no harm to have the grass wet.  It cuts better. 
Dew is a good thing, sir.  It makes no difference with that grass. 
Your grass is young and very hard to cut still.  It's terribly tender. 
It yields before the iron."  Etc.

Cosette was in her usual place, seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen
table near the chimney.  She was in rags; her bare feet were thrust
into wooden shoes, and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting
woollen stockings destined for the young Thenardiers.  A very young
kitten was playing about among the chairs.  Laughter and chatter were
audible in the adjoining room, from two fresh children's voices: 
it was Eponine and Azelma.

In the chimney-corner a cat-o'-nine-tails was hanging on a nail.

At intervals the cry of a very young child, which was somewhere
in the house, rang through the noise of the dram-shop. It was
a little boy who had been born to the Thenardiers during one
of the preceding winters,--"she did not know why," she said,
"the result of the cold,"--and who was a little more than three
years old.  The mother had nursed him, but she did not love him. 
When the persistent clamor of the brat became too annoying,
"Your son is squalling," Thenardier would say; "do go and see
what he wants."  "Bah!" the mother would reply, "he bothers me." 
And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark.



CHAPTER II

TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS


So far in this book the Thenardiers have been viewed only in profile;
the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple,
and considering it under all its aspects.

Thenardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday; Madame Thenardier
was approaching her forties, which is equivalent to fifty in a woman;
so that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife.

Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this
Thenardier woman, ever since her first appearance,--tall, blond,
red, fat, angular, square, enormous, and agile; she belonged, as we
have said, to the race of those colossal wild women, who contort
themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair. 
She did everything about the house,--made the beds, did the washing,
the cooking, and everything else.  Cosette was her only servant;
a mouse in the service of an elephant.  Everything trembled at
the sound of her voice,--window panes, furniture, and people. 
Her big face, dotted with red blotches, presented the appearance
of a skimmer.  She had a beard.  She was an ideal market-porter
dressed in woman's clothes.  She swore splendidly; she boasted
of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist.  Except for
the romances which she had read, and which made the affected lady
peep through the ogress at times, in a very queer way, the idea would
never have occurred to any one to say of her, "That is a woman." 
This Thenardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted
on a fishwife.  When one heard her speak, one said, "That is
a gendarme"; when one saw her drink, one said, "That is a carter";
when one saw her handle Cosette, one said, "That is the hangman." 
One of her teeth projected when her face was in repose.

Thenardier was a small, thin, pale, angular, bony, feeble man, who had
a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy.  His cunning began here;
he smiled habitually, by way of precaution, and was almost polite
to everybody, even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing. 
He had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters. 
He greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbe Delille. 
His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters.  No one had
ever succeeded in rendering him drunk.  He smoked a big pipe. 
He wore a blouse, and under his blouse an old black coat.  He made
pretensions to literature and to materialism.  There were certain
names which he often pronounced to support whatever things he
might be saying,--Voltaire, Raynal, Parny, and, singularly enough,
Saint Augustine.  He declared that he had "a system."  In addition,
he was a great swindler.  A filousophe [philosophe], a scientific thief. 
The species does exist.  It will be remembered that he pretended
to have served in the army; he was in the habit of relating
with exuberance, how, being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light
something or other, at Waterloo, he had alone, and in the presence
of a squadron of death-dealing hussars, covered with his body and saved
from death, in the midst of the grape-shot, "a general, who had been
dangerously wounded."  Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign,
and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood, of "the
cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo."  He was a liberal, a classic,
and a Bonapartist.  He had subscribed for the Champ d'Asile. It was
said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood.

We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper.
This rascal of composite order was, in all probability,
some Fleming from Lille, in Flanders, a Frenchman in Paris,
a Belgian at Brussels, being comfortably astride of both frontiers. 
As for his prowess at Waterloo, the reader is already acquainted
with that.  It will be perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle. 
Ebb and flow, wandering, adventure, was the leven of his existence;
a tattered conscience entails a fragmentary life, and, apparently at
the stormy epoch of June 18, 1815, Thenardier belonged to that
variety of marauding sutlers of which we have spoken, beating about
the country, selling to some, stealing from others, and travelling
like a family man, with wife and children, in a rickety cart,
in the rear of troops on the march, with an instinct for always
attaching himself to the victorious army.  This campaign ended,
and having, as he said, "some quibus," he had come to Montfermeil
and set up an inn there.

This quibus, composed of purses and watches, of gold rings and
silver crosses, gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses,
did not amount to a large total, and did not carry this sutler
turned eating-house-keeper very far.

Thenardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his
gestures which, accompanied by an oath, recalls the barracks,
and by a sign of the cross, the seminary.  He was a fine talker. 
He allowed it to be thought that he was an educated man.  Nevertheless,
the schoolmaster had noticed that he pronounced improperly.[12]


[12] Literally "made cuirs"; i.  e., pronounced a t or an s at
the end of words where the opposite letter should occur, or used
either one of them where neither exists.


He composed the travellers' tariff card in a superior manner,
but practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it. 
Thenardier was cunning, greedy, slothful, and clever.  He did not
disdain his servants, which caused his wife to dispense with them. 
This giantess was jealous.  It seemed to her that that thin and yellow
little man must be an object coveted by all.

Thenardier, who was, above all, an astute and well-balanced man,
was a scamp of a temperate sort.  This is the worst species;
hypocrisy enters into it.

It is not that Thenardier was not, on occasion, capable of wrath
to quite the same degree as his wife; but this was very rare, and at
such times, since he was enraged with the human race in general,
as he bore within him a deep furnace of hatred.  And since he
was one of those people who are continually avenging their wrongs,
who accuse everything that passes before them of everything
which has befallen them, and who are always ready to cast upon
the first person who comes to hand, as a legitimate grievance,
the sum total of the deceptions, the bankruptcies, and the
calamities of their lives,--when all this leaven was stirred up
in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes, he was terrible. 
Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time!

In addition to his other qualities, Thenardier was attentive
and penetrating, silent or talkative, according to circumstances,
and always highly intelligent.  He had something of the look
of sailors, who are accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze
through marine glasses.  Thenardier was a statesman.

Every new-comer who entered the tavern said, on catching sight
of Madame Thenardier, "There is the master of the house." 
A mistake.  She was not even the mistress.  The husband was
both master and mistress.  She worked; he created.  He directed
everything by a sort of invisible and constant magnetic action. 
A word was sufficient for him, sometimes a sign; the mastodon obeyed. 
Thenardier was a sort of special and sovereign being in Madame
Thenardier's eyes, though she did not thoroughly realize it. 
She was possessed of virtues after her own kind; if she had ever had
a disagreement as to any detail with "Monsieur Thenardier,"--which was
an inadmissible hypothesis, by the way,--she would not have blamed
her husband in public on any subject whatever.  She would never have
committed "before strangers" that mistake so often committed by women,
and which is called in parliamentary language, "exposing the crown." 
Although their concord had only evil as its result, there was
contemplation in Madame Thenardier's submission to her husband. 
That mountain of noise and of flesh moved under the little finger
of that frail despot.  Viewed on its dwarfed and grotesque side,
this was that grand and universal thing, the adoration of mind
by matter; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths
of eternal beauty.  There was an unknown quantity about Thenardier;
hence the absolute empire of the man over that woman.  At certain
moments she beheld him like a lighted candle; at others she felt him
like a claw.

This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except
her children, and who did not fear any one except her husband. 
She was a mother because she was mammiferous.  But her maternity
stopped short with her daughters, and, as we shall see, did not extend
to boys.  The man had but one thought,--how to enrich himself.

He did not succeed in this.  A theatre worthy of this great talent
was lacking.  Thenardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil,
if ruin is possible to zero; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this
penniless scamp would have become a millionaire; but an inn-keeper
must browse where fate has hitched him.

It will be understood that the word inn-keeper is here employed
in a restricted sense, and does not extend to an entire class.

In this same year, 1823, Thenardier was burdened with about fifteen
hundred francs' worth of petty debts, and this rendered him anxious.

Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in
this case, Thenardier was one of those men who understand best,
with the most profundity and in the most modern fashion, that thing
which is a virtue among barbarous peoples and an object of
merchandise among civilized peoples,--hospitality.  Besides, he was
an admirable poacher, and quoted for his skill in shooting.  He had
a certain cold and tranquil laugh, which was particularly dangerous.

His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes. 
He had professional aphorisms, which he inserted into his wife's mind. 
"The duty of the inn-keeper," he said to her one day, violently,
and in a low voice, "is to sell to the first comer, stews, repose,
light, fire, dirty sheets, a servant, lice, and a smile; to stop
passers-by, to empty small purses, and to honestly lighten heavy ones;
to shelter travelling families respectfully:  to shave the man,
to pluck the woman, to pick the child clean; to quote the window open,
the window shut, the chimney-corner, the arm-chair, the chair,
the ottoman, the stool, the feather-bed, the mattress and the
truss of straw; to know how much the shadow uses up the mirror,
and to put a price on it; and, by five hundred thousand devils,
to make the traveller pay for everything, even for the flies
which his dog eats!"

This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded--a hideous
and terrible team.

While the husband pondered and combined, Madame Thenardier thought
not of absent creditors, took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow,
and lived in a fit of anger, all in a minute.

Such were these two beings.  Cosette was between them, subjected to
their double pressure, like a creature who is at the same time being
ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers.  The man
and the woman each had a different method:  Cosette was overwhelmed
with blows--this was the woman's; she went barefooted in winter--
that was the man's doing.

Cosette ran up stairs and down, washed, swept, rubbed, dusted, ran,
fluttered about, panted, moved heavy articles, and weak as she was,
did the coarse work.  There was no mercy for her; a fierce mistress
and venomous master.  The Thenardier hostelry was like a spider's web,
in which Cosette had been caught, and where she lay trembling. 
The ideal of oppression was realized by this sinister household. 
It was something like the fly serving the spiders.

The poor child passively held her peace.

What takes place within these souls when they have but just
quitted God, find themselves thus, at the very dawn of life,
very small and in the midst of men all naked!



CHAPTER III

MEN MUST HAVE WINE, AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER


Four new travellers had arrived.

Cosette was meditating sadly; for, although she was only eight years old,
she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious
air of an old woman.  Her eye was black in consequence of a blow
from Madame Thenardier's fist, which caused the latter to remark
from time to time, "How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye!"

Cosette was thinking that it was dark, very dark, that the pitchers
and caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must
have been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern.

She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thenardier establishment
drank much water.  Thirsty people were never lacking there;
but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather
than to the pitcher.  Any one who had asked for a glass of water
among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to
all these men.  But there came a moment when the child trembled;
Madame Thenardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling
on the stove, then seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern. 
She turned the faucet; the child had raised her head and was following
all the woman's movements.  A thin stream of water trickled from
the faucet, and half filled the glass.  "Well," said she, "there is
no more water!"  A momentary silence ensued.  The child did not breathe.

"Bah!" resumed Madame Thenardier, examining the half-filled glass,
"this will be enough."

Cosette applied herself to her work once more, but for a quarter
of an hour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big
snow-flake.

She counted the minutes that passed in this manner, and wished it
were the next morning.

From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street,
and exclaimed, "It's as black as an oven!" or, "One must needs
be a cat to go about the streets without a lantern at this hour!" 
And Cosette trembled.

All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered,
and said in a harsh voice:--

"My horse has not been watered."

"Yes, it has," said Madame Thenardier.

"I tell you that it has not," retorted the pedler.

Cosette had emerged from under the table.

"Oh, yes, sir!" said she, "the horse has had a drink; he drank
out of a bucket, a whole bucketful, and it was I who took the water
to him, and I spoke to him."

It was not true; Cosette lied.

"There's a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house,"
exclaimed the pedler.  "I tell you that he has not been watered,
you little jade!  He has a way of blowing when he has had no water,
which I know well."

Cosette persisted, and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish,
and which was hardly audible:--

"And he drank heartily."

"Come," said the pedler, in a rage, "this won't do at all,
let my horse be watered, and let that be the end of it!"

Cosette crept under the table again.

"In truth, that is fair!" said Madame Thenardier, "if the beast
has not been watered, it must be."

Then glancing about her:--

"Well, now!  Where's that other beast?"

She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end
of the table, almost under the drinkers' feet.

"Are you coming?" shrieked Madame Thenardier.

Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself. 
The Thenardier resumed:--

"Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name, go and water that horse."

"But, Madame," said Cosette, feebly, "there is no water."

The Thenardier threw the street door wide open:--

"Well, go and get some, then!"

Cosette dropped her head, and went for an empty bucket which stood
near the chimney-corner.

This bucket was bigger than she was, and the child could have set
down in it at her ease.

The Thenardier returned to her stove, and tasted what was
in the stewpan, with a wooden spoon, grumbling the while:--

"There's plenty in the spring.  There never was such a malicious
creature as that.  I think I should have done better to strain
my onions."

Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous, pepper, and shallots.

"See here, Mam'selle Toad," she added, "on your way back, you will
get a big loaf from the baker.  Here's a fifteen-sou piece."

Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron; she took
the coin without saying a word, and put it in that pocket.

Then she stood motionless, bucket in hand, the open door before her. 
She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue.

"Get along with you!" screamed the Thenardier.

Cosette went out.  The door closed behind her.



CHAPTER IV

ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL


The line of open-air booths starting at the church, extended, as the
reader will remember, as far as the hostelry of the Thenardiers. 
These booths were all illuminated, because the citizens would
soon pass on their way to the midnight mass, with candles burning
in paper funnels, which, as the schoolmaster, then seated at the
table at the Thenardiers' observed, produced "a magical effect." 
In compensation, not a star was visible in the sky.

The last of these stalls, established precisely opposite the Thenardiers'
door, was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel, glass, and magnificent
objects of tin.  In the first row, and far forwards, the merchant had
placed on a background of white napkins, an immense doll, nearly two
feet high, who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe, with gold wheat-ears
on her head, which had real hair and enamel eyes.  All that day,
this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of all passers-by
under ten years of age, without a mother being found in Montfermeil
sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child. 
Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it, and Cosette
herself had ventured to cast a glance at it, on the sly, it is true.

At the moment when Cosette emerged, bucket in hand, melancholy and
overcome as she was, she could not refrain from lifting her eyes
to that wonderful doll, towards the lady, as she called it. 
The poor child paused in amazement.  She had not yet beheld
that doll close to.  The whole shop seemed a palace to her: 
the doll was not a doll; it was a vision.  It was joy, splendor,
riches, happiness, which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo
to that unhappy little being so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and
chilly misery.  With the sad and innocent sagacity of childhood,
Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from that doll. 
She said to herself that one must be a queen, or at least a princess,
to have a "thing" like that.  She gazed at that beautiful pink dress,
that beautiful smooth hair, and she thought, "How happy that doll
must be!"  She could not take her eyes from that fantastic stall. 
The more she looked, the more dazzled she grew.  She thought she
was gazing at paradise.  There were other dolls behind the large one,
which seemed to her to be fairies and genii.  The merchant, who was
pacing back and forth in front of his shop, produced on her somewhat
the effect of being the Eternal Father.

In this adoration she forgot everything, even the errand with
which she was charged.

All at once the Thenardier's coarse voice recalled her to reality: 
"What, you silly jade! you have not gone?  Wait!  I'll give it
to you!  I want to know what you are doing there!  Get along,
you little monster!"

The Thenardier had cast a glance into the street, and had caught
sight of Cosette in her ecstasy.

Cosette fled, dragging her pail, and taking the longest strides
of which she was capable.



CHAPTER V

THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE


As the Thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is
near the church, it was to the spring in the forest in the direction
of Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water.

She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant.  So long
as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church,
the lighted stalls illuminated the road; but soon the last light from
the last stall vanished.  The poor child found herself in the dark. 
She plunged into it.  Only, as a certain emotion overcame her,
she made as much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket
as she walked along.  This made a noise which afforded her company.

The further she went, the denser the darkness became.  There was no
one in the streets.  However, she did encounter a woman, who turned
around on seeing her, and stood still, muttering between her teeth: 
"Where can that child be going?  Is it a werewolf child?"  Then the
woman recognized Cosette.  "Well," said she, "it's the Lark!"

In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and
deserted streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil
on the side of Chelles.  So long as she had the houses or even
the walls only on both sides of her path, she proceeded with
tolerable boldness.  From time to time she caught the flicker of
a candle through the crack of a shutter--this was light and life;
there were people there, and it reassured her.  But in proportion
as she advanced, her pace slackened mechanically, as it were. 
When she had passed the corner of the last house, Cosette paused. 
It had been hard to advance further than the last stall;
it became impossible to proceed further than the last house. 
She set her bucket on the ground, thrust her hand into her hair,
and began slowly to scratch her head,--a gesture peculiar to children
when terrified and undecided what to do.  It was no longer Montfermeil;
it was the open fields.  Black and desert space was before her. 
She gazed in despair at that darkness, where there was no longer
any one, where there were beasts, where there were spectres, possibly. 
She took a good look, and heard the beasts walking on the grass,
and she distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees.  Then she seized
her bucket again; fear had lent her audacity.  "Bah!" said she;
"I will tell him that there was no more water!"  And she resolutely
re-entered Montfermeil.

Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch
her head again.  Now it was the Thenardier who appeared to her,
with her hideous, hyena mouth, and wrath flashing in her eyes. 
The child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her. 
What was she to do?  What was to become of her?  Where was she to go? 
In front of her was the spectre of the Thenardier; behind her all
the phantoms of the night and of the forest.  It was before the
Thenardier that she recoiled.  She resumed her path to the spring,
and began to run.  She emerged from the village, she entered the
forest at a run, no longer looking at or listening to anything. 
She only paused in her course when her breath failed her;
but she did not halt in her advance.  She went straight before her
in desperation.

As she ran she felt like crying.

The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely.

She no longer thought, she no longer saw.  The immensity of night
was facing this tiny creature.  On the one hand, all shadow;
on the other, an atom.

It was only seven or eight minutes' walk from the edge of the woods
to the spring.  Cosette knew the way, through having gone over it
many times in daylight.  Strange to say, she did not get lost. 
A remnant of instinct guided her vaguely.  But she did not turn
her eyes either to right or to left, for fear of seeing things
in the branches and in the brushwood.  In this manner she reached
the spring.

It was a narrow, natural basin, hollowed out by the water in a
clayey soil, about two feet deep, surrounded with moss and with
those tall, crimped grasses which are called Henry IV.'s frills,
and paved with several large stones.  A brook ran out of it,
with a tranquil little noise.

Cosette did not take time to breathe.  It was very dark, but she
was in the habit of coming to this spring.  She felt with her left
hand in the dark for a young oak which leaned over the spring,
and which usually served to support her, found one of its branches,
clung to it, bent down, and plunged the bucket in the water. 
She was in a state of such violent excitement that her strength
was trebled.  While thus bent over, she did not notice that the pocket
of her apron had emptied itself into the spring.  The fifteen-sou
piece fell into the water.  Cosette neither saw nor heard it fall. 
She drew out the bucket nearly full, and set it on the grass.

That done, she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue. 
She would have liked to set out again at once, but the effort required
to fill the bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take
a step.  She was forced to sit down.  She dropped on the grass,
and remained crouching there.

She shut her eyes; then she opened them again, without knowing why,
but because she could not do otherwise.  The agitated water
in the bucket beside her was describing circles which resembled
tin serpents.

Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds, which were
like masses of smoke.  The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend
vaguely over the child.

Jupiter was setting in the depths.

The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star, with which
she was unfamiliar, and which terrified her.  The planet was,
in fact, very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer
of mist which imparted to it a horrible ruddy hue.  The mist,
gloomily empurpled, magnified the star.  One would have called it
a luminous wound.

A cold wind was blowing from the plain.  The forest was dark,
not a leaf was moving; there were none of the vague, fresh gleams
of summertide.  Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise. 
Slender and misshapen bushes whistled in the clearings.  The tall
grasses undulated like eels under the north wind.  The nettles
seemed to twist long arms furnished with claws in search of prey. 
Some bits of dry heather, tossed by the breeze, flew rapidly by, and had
the air of fleeing in terror before something which was coming after. 
On all sides there were lugubrious stretches.

The darkness was bewildering.  Man requires light.  Whoever buries
himself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract.  When the eye
sees black, the heart sees trouble.  In an eclipse in the night,
in the sooty opacity, there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts. 
No one walks alone in the forest at night without trembling. 
Shadows and trees--two formidable densities.  A chimerical
reality appears in the indistinct depths.  The inconceivable is
outlined a few paces distant from you with a spectral clearness. 
One beholds floating, either in space or in one's own brain,
one knows not what vague and intangible thing, like the dreams
of sleeping flowers.  There are fierce attitudes on the horizon. 
One inhales the effluvia of the great black void.  One is afraid to
glance behind him, yet desirous of doing so.  The cavities of night,
things grown haggard, taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances,
obscure dishevelments, irritated tufts, livid pools, the lugubrious
reflected in the funereal, the sepulchral immensity of silence,
unknown but possible beings, bendings of mysterious branches,
alarming torsos of trees, long handfuls of quivering plants,--
against all this one has no protection.  There is no hardihood which
does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish. 
One is conscious of something hideous, as though one's soul were
becoming amalgamated with the darkness.  This penetration of the
shadows is indescribably sinister in the case of a child.

Forests are apocalypses, and the beating of the wings of a tiny
soul produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault.

Without understanding her sensations, Cosette was conscious
that she was seized upon by that black enormity of nature;
it was no longer terror alone which was gaining possession of her;
it was something more terrible even than terror; she shivered. 
There are no words to express the strangeness of that shiver which
chilled her to the very bottom of her heart; her eye grew wild;
she thought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from
returning there at the same hour on the morrow.

Then, by a sort of instinct, she began to count aloud,
one, two, three, four, and so on up to ten, in order to escape
from that singular state which she did not understand, but which
terrified her, and, when she had finished, she began again;
this restored her to a true perception of the things about her. 
Her hands, which she had wet in drawing the water, felt cold;
she rose; her terror, a natural and unconquerable terror,
had returned:  she had but one thought now,--to flee at full speed
through the forest, across the fields to the houses, to the windows,
to the lighted candles.  Her glance fell upon the water which stood
before her; such was the fright which the Thenardier inspired
in her, that she dared not flee without that bucket of water: 
she seized the handle with both hands; she could hardly lift the pail.

In this manner she advanced a dozen paces, but the bucket was full;
it was heavy; she was forced to set it on the ground once more. 
She took breath for an instant, then lifted the handle of the bucket
again, and resumed her march, proceeding a little further this time,
but again she was obliged to pause.  After some seconds of repose
she set out again.  She walked bent forward, with drooping head,
like an old woman; the weight of the bucket strained and stiffened
her thin arms.  The iron handle completed the benumbing and freezing
of her wet and tiny hands; she was forced to halt from time to time,
and each time that she did so, the cold water which splashed from
the pail fell on her bare legs.  This took place in the depths
of a forest, at night, in winter, far from all human sight;
she was a child of eight:  no one but God saw that sad thing at
the moment.

And her mother, no doubt, alas!

For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in their graves.

She panted with a sort of painful rattle; sobs contracted her throat,
but she dared not weep, so afraid was she of the Thenardier,
even at a distance:  it was her custom to imagine the Thenardier
always present.

However, she could not make much headway in that manner, and she went
on very slowly.  In spite of diminishing the length of her stops,
and of walking as long as possible between them, she reflected
with anguish that it would take her more than an hour to return to
Montfermeil in this manner, and that the Thenardier would beat her. 
This anguish was mingled with her terror at being alone in the woods
at night; she was worn out with fatigue, and had not yet emerged from
the forest.  On arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she
was acquainted, made a last halt, longer than the rest, in order
that she might get well rested; then she summoned up all her strength,
picked up her bucket again, and courageously resumed her march,
but the poor little desperate creature could not refrain from crying,
"O my God! my God!"

At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer
weighed anything at all:  a hand, which seemed to her enormous,
had just seized the handle, and lifted it vigorously.  She raised
her head.  A large black form, straight and erect, was walking beside
her through the darkness; it was a man who had come up behind her,
and whose approach she had not heard.  This man, without uttering
a word, had seized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying.

There are instincts for all the encounters of life.

The child was not afraid.



CHAPTER VI

WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE'S INTELLIGENCE


On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day, 1823, a man had walked
for rather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard
de l'Hopital in Paris.  This man had the air of a person who is
seeking lodgings, and he seemed to halt, by preference, at the most
modest houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau.

We shall see further on that this man had, in fact, hired a chamber
in that isolated quarter.

This man, in his attire, as in all his person, realized the type
of what may be called the well-bred mendicant,--extreme wretchedness
combined with extreme cleanliness.  This is a very rare mixture which
inspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feels
for the man who is very poor, and for the man who is very worthy. 
He wore a very old and very well brushed round hat; a coarse coat,
worn perfectly threadbare, of an ochre yellow, a color that was
not in the least eccentric at that epoch; a large waistcoat with
pockets of a venerable cut; black breeches, worn gray at the knee,
stockings of black worsted; and thick shoes with copper buckles. 
He would have been pronounced a preceptor in some good family,
returned from the emigration.  He would have been taken for more than
sixty years of age, from his perfectly white hair, his wrinkled brow,
his livid lips, and his countenance, where everything breathed
depression and weariness of life.  Judging from his firm tread,
from the singular vigor which stamped all his movements,
he would have hardly been thought fifty.  The wrinkles on his brow
were well placed, and would have disposed in his favor any one
who observed him attentively.  His lip contracted with a strange
fold which seemed severe, and which was humble.  There was in
the depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity. 
In his left hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief;
in his right he leaned on a sort of a cudgel, cut from some hedge. 
This stick had been carefully trimmed, and had an air that was not
too threatening; the most had been made of its knots, and it had
received a coral-like head, made from red wax:  it was a cudgel,
and it seemed to be a cane.

There are but few passers-by on that boulevard, particularly in
the winter.  The man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them,
but this without any affectation.

At that epoch, King Louis XVIII.  went nearly every day to
Choisy-le-Roi: it was one of his favorite excursions.  Towards two
o'clock, almost invariably, the royal carriage and cavalcade
was seen to pass at full speed along the Boulevard de l'Hopital.

This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the quarter
who said, "It is two o'clock; there he is returning to the Tuileries."

And some rushed forward, and others drew up in line, for a passing king
always creates a tumult; besides, the appearance and disappearance
of Louis XVIII.  produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris. 
It was rapid but majestic.  This impotent king had a taste for a
fast gallop; as he was not able to walk, he wished to run:  that cripple
would gladly have had himself drawn by the lightning.  He passed,
pacific and severe, in the midst of naked swords.  His massive couch,
all covered with gilding, with great branches of lilies painted on
the panels, thundered noisily along.  There was hardly time to cast
a glance upon it.  In the rear angle on the right there was visible
on tufted cushions of white satin a large, firm, and ruddy face,
a brow freshly powdered a l'oiseau royal, a proud, hard, crafty eye,
the smile of an educated man, two great epaulets with bullion
fringe floating over a bourgeois coat, the Golden Fleece, the cross
of Saint Louis, the cross of the Legion of Honor, the silver
plaque of the Saint-Esprit, a huge belly, and a wide blue ribbon: 
it was the king.  Outside of Paris, he held his hat decked with white
ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high English gaiters;
when he re-entered the city, he put on his hat and saluted rarely;
he stared coldly at the people, and they returned it in kind. 
When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter,
the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an
inhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade, "That big fellow yonder is
the government."

This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was, therefore,
the daily event of the Boulevard de l'Hopital.

The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in
the quarter, and probably did not belong in Paris, for he was ignorant
as to this detail.  When, at two o'clock, the royal carriage,
surrounded by a squadron of the body-guard all covered with
silver lace, debouched on the boulevard, after having made the turn
of the Salpetriere, he appeared surprised and almost alarmed. 
There was no one but himself in this cross-lane. He drew
up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an enclosure,
though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havre from spying him out.

M. le Duc de Havre, as captain of the guard on duty that day,
was seated in the carriage, opposite the king.  He said to his
Majesty, "Yonder is an evil-looking man."  Members of the police,
who were clearing the king's route, took equal note of him: 
one of them received an order to follow him.  But the man plunged
into the deserted little streets of the faubourg, and as twilight
was beginning to fall, the agent lost trace of him, as is stated
in a report addressed that same evening to M. le Comte d'Angles,
Minister of State, Prefect of Police.

When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track,
he redoubled his pace, not without turning round many a time to assure
himself that he was not being followed.  At a quarter-past four,
that is to say, when night was fully come, he passed in front of the
theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin, where The Two Convicts was being
played that day.  This poster, illuminated by the theatre lanterns,
struck him; for, although he was walking rapidly, he halted to read it. 
An instant later he was in the blind alley of La Planchette, and he
entered the Plat d'Etain [the Pewter Platter], where the office
of the coach for Lagny was then situated.  This coach set out at
half-past four.  The horses were harnessed, and the travellers,
summoned by the coachman, were hastily climbing the lofty iron ladder
of the vehicle.

The man inquired:--

"Have you a place?"

"Only one--beside me on the box," said the coachman.

"I will take it."

"Climb up."

Nevertheless, before setting out, the coachman cast a glance at
the traveller's shabby dress, at the diminutive size of his bundle,
and made him pay his fare.

"Are you going as far as Lagny?" demanded the coachman.

"Yes," said the man.

The traveller paid to Lagny.

They started.  When they had passed the barrier, the coachman
tried to enter into conversation, but the traveller only replied
in monosyllables.  The coachman took to whistling and swearing
at his horses.

The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak.  It was cold. 
The man did not appear to be thinking of that.  Thus they passed
Gournay and Neuilly-sur-Marne.

Towards six o'clock in the evening they reached Chelles.  The coachman
drew up in front of the carters' inn installed in the ancient
buildings of the Royal Abbey, to give his horses a breathing spell.

"I get down here," said the man.

He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle.

An instant later he had disappeared.

He did not enter the inn.

When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later, it did not
encounter him in the principal street of Chelles.

The coachman turned to the inside travellers.

"There," said he, "is a man who does not belong here, for I do not
know him.  He had not the air of owning a sou, but he does not
consider money; he pays to Lagny, and he goes only as far as Chelles. 
It is night; all the houses are shut; he does not enter the inn,
and he is not to be found.  So he has dived through the earth."

The man had not plunged into the earth, but he had gone with great
strides through the dark, down the principal street of Chelles,
then he had turned to the right before reaching the church,
into the cross-road leading to Montfermeil, like a person who was
acquainted with the country and had been there before.

He followed this road rapidly.  At the spot where it is intersected
by the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny,
he heard people coming.  He concealed himself precipitately in
a ditch, and there waited until the passers-by were at a distance. 
The precaution was nearly superfluous, however; for, as we have
already said, it was a very dark December night.  Not more than two
or three stars were visible in the sky.

It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins.  The man did
not return to the road to Montfermeil; he struck across the fields
to the right, and entered the forest with long strides.

Once in the forest he slackened his pace, and began a careful
examination of all the trees, advancing, step by step, as though
seeking and following a mysterious road known to himself alone. 
There came a moment when he appeared to lose himself, and he paused
in indecision.  At last he arrived, by dint of feeling his way inch
by inch, at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones. 
He stepped up briskly to these stones, and examined them attentively
through the mists of night, as though he were passing them in review. 
A large tree, covered with those excrescences which are the warts
of vegetation, stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones. 
He went up to this tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk,
as though seeking to recognize and count all the warts.

Opposite this tree, which was an ash, there was a chestnut-tree,
suffering from a peeling of the bark, to which a band of zinc
had been nailed by way of dressing.  He raised himself on tiptoe
and touched this band of zinc.

Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space
between the tree and the heap of stones, like a person who is trying
to assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed.

That done, he took his bearings, and resumed his march through
the forest.

It was the man who had just met Cosette.

As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil,
he had espied that tiny shadow moving with a groan, depositing a
burden on the ground, then taking it up and setting out again. 
He drew near, and perceived that it was a very young child,
laden with an enormous bucket of water.  Then he approached the child,
and silently grasped the handle of the bucket.



CHAPTER VII

COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK


Cosette, as we have said, was not frightened.

The man accosted her.  He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost bass.

"My child, what you are carrying is very heavy for you."

Cosette raised her head and replied:--

"Yes, sir."

"Give it to me," said the man; "I will carry it for you."

Cosette let go of the bucket-handle. The man walked along beside her.

"It really is very heavy," he muttered between his teeth. 
Then he added:--

"How old are you, little one?"

"Eight, sir."

"And have you come from far like this?"

"From the spring in the forest."

"Are you going far?"

"A good quarter of an hour's walk from here."

The man said nothing for a moment; then he remarked abruptly:--

"So you have no mother."

"I don't know," answered the child.

Before the man had time to speak again, she added:--

"I don't think so.  Other people have mothers.  I have none."

And after a silence she went on:--

"I think that I never had any."

The man halted; he set the bucket on the ground, bent down and
placed both hands on the child's shoulders, making an effort
to look at her and to see her face in the dark.

Cosette's thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid
light in the sky.

"What is your name?" said the man.

"Cosette."

The man seemed to have received an electric shock.  He looked at
her once more; then he removed his hands from Cosette's shoulders,
seized the bucket, and set out again.

After a moment he inquired:--

"Where do you live, little one?"

"At Montfermeil, if you know where that is."

"That is where we are going?"

"Yes, sir."

He paused; then began again:--

"Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest?"

"It was Madame Thenardier."

The man resumed, in a voice which he strove to render indifferent,
but in which there was, nevertheless, a singular tremor:--

"What does your Madame Thenardier do?"

"She is my mistress," said the child.  "She keeps the inn."

"The inn?" said the man.  "Well, I am going to lodge there to-night.
Show me the way."

"We are on the way there," said the child.

The man walked tolerably fast.  Cosette followed him without difficulty. 
She no longer felt any fatigue.  From time to time she raised
her eyes towards the man, with a sort of tranquillity and an
indescribable confidence.  She had never been taught to turn to
Providence and to pray; nevertheless, she felt within her something
which resembled hope and joy, and which mounted towards heaven.

Several minutes elapsed.  The man resumed:--

"Is there no servant in Madame Thenardier's house?"

"No, sir."

"Are you alone there?"

"Yes, sir."

Another pause ensued.  Cosette lifted up her voice:--

"That is to say, there are two little girls."

"What little girls?"

"Ponine and Zelma."

This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear
to the female Thenardier.

"Who are Ponine and Zelma?"

"They are Madame Thenardier's young ladies; her daughters, as you
would say."

"And what do those girls do?"

"Oh!" said the child, "they have beautiful dolls; things with gold
in them, all full of affairs.  They play; they amuse themselves."

"All day long?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you?"

"I?  I work."

"All day long?"

The child raised her great eyes, in which hung a tear, which was
not visible because of the darkness, and replied gently:--

"Yes, sir."

After an interval of silence she went on:--

"Sometimes, when I have finished my work and they let me,
I amuse myself, too."

"How do you amuse yourself?"

"In the best way I can.  They let me alone; but I have not
many playthings.  Ponine and Zelma will not let me play with
their dolls.  I have only a little lead sword, no longer than that."

The child held up her tiny finger.

"And it will not cut?"

"Yes, sir," said the child; "it cuts salad and the heads of flies."

They reached the village.  Cosette guided the stranger through
the streets.  They passed the bakeshop, but Cosette did not think
of the bread which she had been ordered to fetch.  The man had
ceased to ply her with questions, and now preserved a gloomy silence.

When they had left the church behind them, the man, on perceiving
all the open-air booths, asked Cosette:--

"So there is a fair going on here?"

"No, sir; it is Christmas."

As they approached the tavern, Cosette timidly touched his arm:--

"Monsieur?"

"What, my child?"

"We are quite near the house."

"Well?"

"Will you let me take my bucket now?"

"Why?"

"If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me, she will beat me."

The man handed her the bucket.  An instant later they were at
the tavern door.



CHAPTER VIII

THE UNPLEASANTNESS OF RECEIVING INTO ONE'S HOUSE A POOR MAN WHO
MAY BE A RICH MAN


Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big doll,
which was still displayed at the toy-merchant's; then she knocked. 
The door opened.  The Thenardier appeared with a candle in her hand.


"Ah! so it's you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you've taken
your time!  The hussy has been amusing herself!"

"Madame," said Cosette, trembling all over, "here's a gentleman
who wants a lodging."

The Thenardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace,
a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought
the new-comer with her eyes.

"This is the gentleman?" said she.

"Yes, Madame," replied the man, raising his hand to his hat.

Wealthy travellers are not so polite.  This gesture, and an inspection
of the stranger's costume and baggage, which the Thenardier passed
in review with one glance, caused the amiable grimace to vanish,
and the gruff mien to reappear.  She resumed dryly:--

"Enter, my good man."

The "good man" entered.  The Thenardier cast a second glance
at him, paid particular attention to his frock-coat, which was
absolutely threadbare, and to his hat, which was a little battered,
and, tossing her head, wrinkling her nose, and screwing up her eyes,
she consulted her husband, who was still drinking with the carters. 
The husband replied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger,
which, backed up by an inflation of the lips, signifies in such cases: 
A regular beggar.  Thereupon, the Thenardier exclaimed:--

"Ah! see here, my good man; I am very sorry, but I have no room left."

"Put me where you like," said the man; "in the attic, in the stable. 
I will pay as though I occupied a room."

"Forty sous."

"Forty sous; agreed."

"Very well, then!"

"Forty sous!" said a carter, in a low tone, to the Thenardier woman;
"why, the charge is only twenty sous!"

"It is forty in his case," retorted the Thenardier, in the same tone. 
"I don't lodge poor folks for less."

"That's true," added her husband, gently; "it ruins a house to have
such people in it."

In the meantime, the man, laying his bundle and his cudgel on
a bench, had seated himself at a table, on which Cosette made
haste to place a bottle of wine and a glass.  The merchant who
had demanded the bucket of water took it to his horse himself. 
Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table, and her knitting.

The man, who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had
poured out for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention.

Cosette was ugly.  If she had been happy, she might have been pretty. 
We have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure. 
Cosette was thin and pale; she was nearly eight years old, but she
seemed to be hardly six.  Her large eyes, sunken in a sort of shadow,
were almost put out with weeping.  The corners of her mouth had that
curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned persons and
desperately sick people.  Her hands were, as her mother had divined,
"ruined with chilblains."  The fire which illuminated her at that
moment brought into relief all the angles of her bones, and rendered
her thinness frightfully apparent.  As she was always shivering,
she had acquired the habit of pressing her knees one against the other. 
Her entire clothing was but a rag which would have inspired pity
in summer, and which inspired horror in winter.  All she had on was
hole-ridden linen, not a scrap of woollen.  Her skin was visible
here and there and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried,
which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched her. 
Her naked legs were thin and red.  The hollows in her neck were
enough to make one weep.  This child's whole person, her mien,
her attitude, the sound of her voice, the intervals which she
allowed to elapse between one word and the next, her glance,
her silence, her slightest gesture, expressed and betrayed one
sole idea,--fear.

Fear was diffused all over her; she was covered with it, so to speak;
fear drew her elbows close to her hips, withdrew her heels under
her petticoat, made her occupy as little space as possible,
allowed her only the breath that was absolutely necessary, and had
become what might be called the habit of her body, admitting of no
possible variation except an increase.  In the depths of her eyes
there was an astonished nook where terror lurked.

Her fear was such, that on her arrival, wet as she was, Cosette did
not dare to approach the fire and dry herself, but sat silently
down to her work again.

The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually
so gloomy, and at times so tragic, that it seemed at certain moments
as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon.

As we have stated, she had never known what it is to pray; she had
never set foot in a church.  "Have I the time?" said the Thenardier.

The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette.

All at once, the Thenardier exclaimed:--

"By the way, where's that bread?"

Cosette, according to her custom whenever the Thenardier uplifted
her voice, emerged with great haste from beneath the table.

She had completely forgotten the bread.  She had recourse to the
expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear. 
She lied.

"Madame, the baker's shop was shut."

"You should have knocked."

"I did knock, Madame."

"Well?"

"He did not open the door."

"I'll find out to-morrow whether that is true," said the Thenardier;
"and if you are telling me a lie, I'll lead you a pretty dance. 
In the meantime, give me back my fifteen-sou piece."

Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron, and turned green. 
The fifteen-sou piece was not there.

"Ah, come now," said Madame Thenardier, "did you hear me?"

Cosette turned her pocket inside out; there was nothing in it. 
What could have become of that money?  The unhappy little creature
could not find a word to say.  She was petrified.

"Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece?" screamed the Thenardier,
hoarsely, "or do you want to rob me of it?"

At the same time, she stretched out her arm towards
the cat-o'-nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner.

This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength
to shriek:--

"Mercy, Madame, Madame!  I will not do so any more!"

The Thenardier took down the whip.

In the meantime, the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the
fob of his waistcoat, without any one having noticed his movements. 
Besides, the other travellers were drinking or playing cards,
and were not paying attention to anything.

Cosette contracted herself into a ball, with anguish, within the
angle of the chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal
her poor half-nude limbs.  The Thenardier raised her arm.

"Pardon me, Madame," said the man, "but just now I caught sight
of something which had fallen from this little one's apron pocket,
and rolled aside.  Perhaps this is it."

At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching
on the floor for a moment.

"Exactly; here it is," he went on, straightening himself up.

And he held out a silver coin to the Thenardier.

"Yes, that's it," said she.

It was not it, for it was a twenty-sou piece; but the Thenardier
found it to her advantage.  She put the coin in her pocket,
and confined herself to casting a fierce glance at the child,
accompanied with the remark, "Don't let this ever happen again!"

Cosette returned to what the Thenardier called "her kennel,"
and her large eyes, which were riveted on the traveller,
began to take on an expression such as they had never worn before. 
Thus far it was only an innocent amazement, but a sort of stupefied
confidence was mingled with it.

"By the way, would you like some supper?" the Thenardier inquired
of the traveller.

He made no reply.  He appeared to be absorbed in thought.

"What sort of a man is that?" she muttered between her teeth. 
"He's some frightfully poor wretch.  He hasn't a sou to pay for
a supper.  Will he even pay me for his lodging?  It's very lucky,
all the same, that it did not occur to him to steal the money that
was on the floor."

In the meantime, a door had opened, and Eponine and Azelma entered.

They were two really pretty little girls, more bourgeois than
peasant in looks, and very charming; the one with shining chestnut
tresses, the other with long black braids hanging down her back,
both vivacious, neat, plump, rosy, and healthy, and a delight
to the eye.  They were warmly clad, but with so much maternal art
that the thickness of the stuffs did not detract from the coquetry
of arrangement.  There was a hint of winter, though the springtime
was not wholly effaced.  Light emanated from these two little beings. 
Besides this, they were on the throne.  In their toilettes,
in their gayety, in the noise which they made, there was sovereignty. 
When they entered, the Thenardier said to them in a grumbling
tone which was full of adoration, "Ah! there you are, you children!"

Then drawing them, one after the other to her knees, smoothing
their hair, tying their ribbons afresh, and then releasing them
with that gentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers,
she exclaimed, "What frights they are!"

They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner. They had
a doll, which they turned over and over on their knees with all
sorts of joyous chatter.  From time to time Cosette raised her eyes
from her knitting, and watched their play with a melancholy air.

Eponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette.  She was the same
as a dog to them.  These three little girls did not yet reckon up
four and twenty years between them, but they already represented
the whole society of man; envy on the one side, disdain on the other.

The doll of the Thenardier sisters was very much faded, very old,
and much broken; but it seemed none the less admirable to Cosette,
who had never had a doll in her life, a real doll, to make use
of the expression which all children will understand.

All at once, the Thenardier, who had been going back and forth
in the room, perceived that Cosette's mind was distracted, and that,
instead of working, she was paying attention to the little ones
at their play.

"Ah!  I've caught you at it!" she cried.  "So that's the way you work! 
I'll make you work to the tune of the whip; that I will."

The stranger turned to the Thenardier, without quitting his chair.

"Bah, Madame," he said, with an almost timid air, "let her play!"

Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of
mutton and had drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper,
and who had not the air of being frightfully poor, would have been
equivalent to an order.  But that a man with such a hat should
permit himself such a desire, and that a man with such a coat
should permit himself to have a will, was something which Madame
Thenardier did not intend to tolerate.  She retorted with acrimony:--

"She must work, since she eats.  I don't feed her to do nothing."

"What is she making?" went on the stranger, in a gentle voice
which contrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his
porter's shoulders.

The Thenardier deigned to reply:--

"Stockings, if you please.  Stockings for my little girls,
who have none, so to speak, and who are absolutely barefoot just now."

The man looked at Cosette's poor little red feet, and continued:--

"When will she have finished this pair of stockings?"

"She has at least three or four good days' work on them still,
the lazy creature!"

"And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she has
finished them?"

The Thenardier cast a glance of disdain on him.

"Thirty sous at least."

"Will you sell them for five francs?" went on the man.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed a carter who was listening, with a loud laugh;
"five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!"

Thenardier thought it time to strike in.

"Yes, sir; if such is your fancy, you will be allowed to have that pair
of stockings for five francs.  We can refuse nothing to travellers."

"You must pay on the spot," said the Thenardier, in her curt
and peremptory fashion.

"I will buy that pair of stockings," replied the man, "and," he added,
drawing a five-franc piece from his pocket, and laying it on the table,
"I will pay for them."

Then he turned to Cosette.

"Now I own your work; play, my child."

The carter was so much touched by the five-franc piece, that he
abandoned his glass and hastened up.

"But it's true!" he cried, examining it.  "A real hind wheel!
and not counterfeit!"

Thenardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket.

The Thenardier had no reply to make.  She bit her lips, and her
face assumed an expression of hatred.

In the meantime, Cosette was trembling.  She ventured to ask:--

"Is it true, Madame?  May I play?"

"Play!" said the Thenardier, in a terrible voice.

"Thanks, Madame," said Cosette.

And while her mouth thanked the Thenardier, her whole little soul
thanked the traveller.

Thenardier had resumed his drinking; his wife whispered in his ear:--

"Who can this yellow man be?"

"I have seen millionaires with coats like that," replied Thenardier,
in a sovereign manner.

Cosette had dropped her knitting, but had not left her seat. 
Cosette always moved as little as possible.  She picked up some old
rags and her little lead sword from a box behind her.

Eponine and Azelma paid no attention to what was going on. 
They had just executed a very important operation; they had just
got hold of the cat.  They had thrown their doll on the ground,
and Eponine, who was the elder, was swathing the little cat, in spite
of its mewing and its contortions, in a quantity of clothes and red
and blue scraps.  While performing this serious and difficult work
she was saying to her sister in that sweet and adorable language
of children, whose grace, like the splendor of the butterfly's wing,
vanishes when one essays to fix it fast.

"You see, sister, this doll is more amusing than the other. 
She twists, she cries, she is warm.  See, sister, let us play with her. 
She shall be my little girl.  I will be a lady.  I will come to
see you, and you shall look at her.  Gradually, you will perceive
her whiskers, and that will surprise you.  And then you will see
her ears, and then you will see her tail and it will amaze you. 
And you will say to me, `Ah! Mon Dieu!' and I will say to you: 
`Yes, Madame, it is my little girl.  Little girls are made like that
just at present.'"

Azelma listened admiringly to Eponine.

In the meantime, the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song,
and to laugh at it until the ceiling shook.  Thenardier accompanied
and encouraged them.

As birds make nests out of everything, so children make a doll
out of anything which comes to hand.  While Eponine and Azelma were
bundling up the cat, Cosette, on her side, had dressed up her sword. 
That done, she laid it in her arms, and sang to it softly, to lull
it to sleep.

The doll is one of the most imperious needs and, at the same time,
one of the most charming instincts of feminine childhood. 
To care for, to clothe, to deck, to dress, to undress, to redress,
to teach, scold a little, to rock, to dandle, to lull to sleep,
to imagine that something is some one,--therein lies the whole
woman's future.  While dreaming and chattering, making tiny outfits,
and baby clothes, while sewing little gowns, and corsages and bodices,
the child grows into a young girl, the young girl into a big girl,
the big girl into a woman.  The first child is the continuation of the
last doll.

A little girl without a doll is almost as unhappy, and quite
as impossible, as a woman without children.

So Cosette had made herself a doll out of the sword.

Madame Thenardier approached the yellow man; "My husband is right,"
she thought; "perhaps it is M. Laffitte; there are such queer
rich men!"

She came and set her elbows on the table.

"Monsieur," said she.  At this word, Monsieur, the man turned;
up to that time, the Thenardier had addressed him only as brave homme
or bonhomme.

"You see, sir," she pursued, assuming a sweetish air that was
even more repulsive to behold than her fierce mien, "I am willing
that the child should play; I do not oppose it, but it is good
for once, because you are generous.  You see, she has nothing;
she must needs work."

"Then this child is not yours?" demanded the man.

"Oh! mon Dieu! no, sir! she is a little beggar whom we have taken
in through charity; a sort of imbecile child.  She must have water
on the brain; she has a large head, as you see.  We do what we
can for her, for we are not rich; we have written in vain to her
native place, and have received no reply these six months. 
It must be that her mother is dead."

"Ah!" said the man, and fell into his revery once more.

"Her mother didn't amount to much," added the Thenardier;
"she abandoned her child."

During the whole of this conversation Cosette, as though warned
by some instinct that she was under discussion, had not taken her
eyes from the Thenardier's face; she listened vaguely; she caught
a few words here and there.

Meanwhile, the drinkers, all three-quarters intoxicated, were repeating
their unclean refrain with redoubled gayety; it was a highly
spiced and wanton song, in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus
were introduced.  The Thenardier went off to take part in the shouts
of laughter.  Cosette, from her post under the table, gazed at the fire,
which was reflected from her fixed eyes.  She had begun to rock
the sort of baby which she had made, and, as she rocked it, she sang
in a low voice, "My mother is dead! my mother is dead! my mother is dead!"

On being urged afresh by the hostess, the yellow man, "the millionaire,"
consented at last to take supper.

"What does Monsieur wish?"

"Bread and cheese," said the man.

"Decidedly, he is a beggar" thought Madame Thenardier.

The drunken men were still singing their song, and the child under
the table was singing hers.

All at once, Cosette paused; she had just turned round and caught
sight of the little Thenardiers' doll, which they had abandoned for
the cat and had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table.

Then she dropped the swaddled sword, which only half met her needs,
and cast her eyes slowly round the room.  Madame Thenardier
was whispering to her husband and counting over some money;
Ponine and Zelma were playing with the cat; the travellers were
eating or drinking or singing; not a glance was fixed on her. 
She had not a moment to lose; she crept out from under the table on
her hands and knees, made sure once more that no one was watching her;
then she slipped quickly up to the doll and seized it.  An instant
later she was in her place again, seated motionless, and only turned
so as to cast a shadow on the doll which she held in her arms. 
The happiness of playing with a doll was so rare for her that it
contained all the violence of voluptuousness.

No one had seen her, except the traveller, who was slowly devouring
his meagre supper.

This joy lasted about a quarter of an hour.

But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did not
perceive that one of the doll's legs stuck out and that the fire on
the hearth lighted it up very vividly.  That pink and shining foot,
projecting from the shadow, suddenly struck the eye of Azelma,
who said to Eponine, "Look! sister."

The two little girls paused in stupefaction; Cosette had dared
to take their doll!

Eponine rose, and, without releasing the cat, she ran to her mother,
and began to tug at her skirt.

"Let me alone!" said her mother; "what do you want?"

"Mother," said the child, "look there!"

And she pointed to Cosette.

Cosette, absorbed in the ecstasies of possession, no longer saw
or heard anything.

Madame Thenardier's countenance assumed that peculiar expression
which is composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life,
and which has caused this style of woman to be named megaeras.

On this occasion, wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further. 
Cosette had overstepped all bounds; Cosette had laid violent hands
on the doll belonging to "these young ladies."  A czarina who should
see a muzhik trying on her imperial son's blue ribbon would wear
no other face.

She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation:--

"Cosette!"

Cosette started as though the earth had trembled beneath her;
she turned round.

"Cosette!" repeated the Thenardier.

Cosette took the doll and laid it gently on the floor with a
sort of veneration, mingled with despair; then, without taking
her eyes from it, she clasped her hands, and, what is terrible
to relate of a child of that age, she wrung them; then--not one
of the emotions of the day, neither the trip to the forest,
nor the weight of the bucket of water, nor the loss of the money,
nor the sight of the whip, nor even the sad words which she had
heard Madame Thenardier utter had been able to wring this from her--
she wept; she burst out sobbing.

Meanwhile, the traveller had risen to his feet.

"What is the matter?" he said to the Thenardier.

"Don't you see?" said the Thenardier, pointing to the corpus delicti
which lay at Cosette's feet.

"Well, what of it?" resumed the man.

"That beggar," replied the Thenardier, "has permitted herself
to touch the children's doll!"

"All this noise for that!" said the man; "well, what if she did
play with that doll?"

"She touched it with her dirty hands!" pursued the Thenardier,
"with her frightful hands!"

Here Cosette redoubled her sobs.

"Will you stop your noise?" screamed the Thenardier.

The man went straight to the street door, opened it, and stepped out.

As soon as he had gone, the Thenardier profited by his absence
to give Cosette a hearty kick under the table, which made the child
utter loud cries.

The door opened again, the man re-appeared; he carried in both
hands the fabulous doll which we have mentioned, and which all
the village brats had been staring at ever since the morning,
and he set it upright in front of Cosette, saying:--

"Here; this is for you."

It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which he
had spent there he had taken confused notice through his revery of that
toy shop, lighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly that it
was visible like an illumination through the window of the drinking-shop.

Cosette raised her eyes; she gazed at the man approaching her
with that doll as she might have gazed at the sun; she heard
the unprecedented words, "It is for you"; she stared at him;
she stared at the doll; then she slowly retreated, and hid herself
at the extreme end, under the table in a corner of the wall.

She no longer cried; she no longer wept; she had the appearance
of no longer daring to breathe.

The Thenardier, Eponine, and Azelma were like statues also;
the very drinkers had paused; a solemn silence reigned through
the whole room.

Madame Thenardier, petrified and mute, recommenced her conjectures: 
"Who is that old fellow?  Is he a poor man?  Is he a millionaire? 
Perhaps he is both; that is to say, a thief."

The face of the male Thenardier presented that expressive fold
which accentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant
instinct appears there in all its bestial force.  The tavern-keeper
stared alternately at the doll and at the traveller; he seemed to be
scenting out the man, as he would have scented out a bag of money. 
This did not last longer than the space of a flash of lightning. 
He stepped up to his wife and said to her in a low voice:--

"That machine costs at least thirty francs.  No nonsense. 
Down on your belly before that man!"

Gross natures have this in common with naive natures, that they
possess no transition state.

"Well, Cosette," said the Thenardier, in a voice that strove to be sweet,
and which was composed of the bitter honey of malicious women,
"aren't you going to take your doll?"

Cosette ventured to emerge from her hole.

"The gentleman has given you a doll, my little Cosette,"
said Thenardier, with a caressing air.  "Take it; it is yours."

Cosette gazed at the marvellous doll in a sort of terror. 
Her face was still flooded with tears, but her eyes began to fill,
like the sky at daybreak, with strange beams of joy.  What she felt
at that moment was a little like what she would have felt if she
had been abruptly told, "Little one, you are the Queen of France."

It seemed to her that if she touched that doll, lightning would
dart from it.

This was true, up to a certain point, for she said to herself
that the Thenardier would scold and beat her.

Nevertheless, the attraction carried the day.  She ended by drawing
near and murmuring timidly as she turned towards Madame Thenardier:--

"May I, Madame?"

No words can render that air, at once despairing, terrified, and ecstatic.

"Pardi!" cried the Thenardier, "it is yours.  The gentleman has
given it to you."

"Truly, sir?" said Cosette.  "Is it true?  Is the `lady' mine?"

The stranger's eyes seemed to be full of tears.  He appeared
to have reached that point of emotion where a man does not speak
for fear lest he should weep.  He nodded to Cosette, and placed
the "lady's" hand in her tiny hand.

Cosette hastily withdrew her hand, as though that of the "lady"
scorched her, and began to stare at the floor.  We are forced
to add that at that moment she stuck out her tongue immoderately. 
All at once she wheeled round and seized the doll in a transport.

"I shall call her Catherine," she said.

It was an odd moment when Cosette's rags met and clasped the ribbons
and fresh pink muslins of the doll.

"Madame," she resumed, "may I put her on a chair?"

"Yes, my child," replied the Thenardier.

It was now the turn of Eponine and Azelma to gaze at Cosette with envy.

Cosette placed Catherine on a chair, then seated herself on the floor
in front of her, and remained motionless, without uttering a word,
in an attitude of contemplation.

"Play, Cosette," said the stranger.

"Oh!  I am playing," returned the child.

This stranger, this unknown individual, who had the air of a
visit which Providence was making on Cosette, was the person
whom the Thenardier hated worse than any one in the world at
that moment.  However, it was necessary to control herself. 
Habituated as she was to dissimulation through endeavoring to copy
her husband in all his actions, these emotions were more than
she could endure.  She made haste to send her daughters to bed,
then she asked the man's permission to send Cosette off also;
"for she has worked hard all day," she added with a maternal air. 
Cosette went off to bed, carrying Catherine in her arms.

From time to time the Thenardier went to the other end of the
room where her husband was, to relieve her soul, as she said. 
She exchanged with her husband words which were all the more furious
because she dared not utter them aloud.

"Old beast!  What has he got in his belly, to come and upset us
in this manner!  To want that little monster to play! to give away
forty-franc dolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous,
so I would!  A little more and he will be saying Your Majesty to her,
as though to the Duchess de Berry!  Is there any sense in it? 
Is he mad, then, that mysterious old fellow?"

"Why! it is perfectly simple," replied Thenardier, "if that amuses him! 
It amuses you to have the little one work; it amuses him to have
her play.  He's all right.  A traveller can do what he pleases
when he pays for it.  If the old fellow is a philanthropist,
what is that to you?  If he is an imbecile, it does not concern you. 
What are you worrying for, so long as he has money?"

The language of a master, and the reasoning of an innkeeper,
neither of which admitted of any reply.

The man had placed his elbows on the table, and resumed his
thoughtful attitude.  All the other travellers, both pedlers
and carters, had withdrawn a little, and had ceased singing. 
They were staring at him from a distance, with a sort of respectful awe. 
This poorly dressed man, who drew "hind-wheels" from his pocket with
so much ease, and who lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats
in wooden shoes, was certainly a magnificent fellow, and one to be feared.

Many hours passed.  The midnight mass was over, the chimes had ceased,
the drinkers had taken their departure, the drinking-shop was closed,
the public room was deserted, the fire extinct, the stranger still
remained in the same place and the same attitude.  From time
to time he changed the elbow on which he leaned.  That was all;
but he had not said a word since Cosette had left the room.

The Thenardiers alone, out of politeness and curiosity, had remained
in the room.

"Is he going to pass the night in that fashion?" grumbled the Thenardier. 
When two o'clock in the morning struck, she declared herself vanquished,
and said to her husband, "I'm going to bed.  Do as you like." 
Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner, lighted a candle,
and began to read the Courrier Francais.

A good hour passed thus.  The worthy inn-keeper had perused the
Courrier Francais at least three times, from the date of the number
to the printer's name.  The stranger did not stir.

Thenardier fidgeted, coughed, spit, blew his nose, and creaked
his chair.  Not a movement on the man's part.  "Is he asleep?"
thought Thenardier.  The man was not asleep, but nothing could
arouse him.

At last Thenardier took off his cap, stepped gently up to him,
and ventured to say:--

"Is not Monsieur going to his repose?"

Not going to bed would have seemed to him excessive and familiar. 
To repose smacked of luxury and respect.  These words possess
the mysterious and admirable property of swelling the bill on
the following day.  A chamber where one sleeps costs twenty sous;
a chamber in which one reposes costs twenty francs.

"Well!" said the stranger, "you are right.  Where is your stable?"

"Sir!" exclaimed Thenardier, with a smile, "I will conduct you, sir."

He took the candle; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel,
and Thenardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor,
which was of rare splendor, all furnished in mahogany, with a
low bedstead, curtained with red calico.

"What is this?" said the traveller.

"It is really our bridal chamber," said the tavern-keeper. "My wife
and I occupy another.  This is only entered three or four times
a year."

"I should have liked the stable quite as well," said the man, abruptly.

Thenardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark.

He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on
the chimney-piece. A very good fire was flickering on the hearth.

On the chimney-piece, under a glass globe, stood a woman's head-dress
in silver wire and orange flowers.

"And what is this?" resumed the stranger.

"That, sir," said Thenardier, "is my wife's wedding bonnet."

The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say,
"There really was a time, then, when that monster was a maiden?"

Thenardier lied, however.  When he had leased this paltry building
for the purpose of converting it into a tavern, he had found
this chamber decorated in just this manner, and had purchased
the furniture and obtained the orange flowers at second hand,
with the idea that this would cast a graceful shadow on "his spouse,"
and would result in what the English call respectability for his house.

When the traveller turned round, the host had disappeared. 
Thenardier had withdrawn discreetly, without venturing to wish him
a good night, as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality
a man whom he proposed to fleece royally the following morning.

The inn-keeper retired to his room.  His wife was in bed, but she
was not asleep.  When she heard her husband's step she turned
over and said to him:--

"Do you know, I'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow."

Thenardier replied coldly:--

"How you do go on!"

They exchanged no further words, and a few moments later their
candle was extinguished.

As for the traveller, he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle
in a corner.  The landlord once gone, he threw himself into
an arm-chair and remained for some time buried in thought. 
Then he removed his shoes, took one of the two candles,
blew out the other, opened the door, and quitted the room,
gazing about him like a person who is in search of something. 
He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase.  There he heard
a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child. 
He followed this sound, and came to a sort of triangular recess built
under the staircase, or rather formed by the staircase itself. 
This recess was nothing else than the space under the steps. 
There, in the midst of all sorts of old papers and potsherds,
among dust and spiders' webs, was a bed--if one can call by the name
of bed a straw pallet so full of holes as to display the straw,
and a coverlet so tattered as to show the pallet.  No sheets. 
This was placed on the floor.

In this bed Cosette was sleeping.

The man approached and gazed down upon her.

Cosette was in a profound sleep; she was fully dressed.  In the
winter she did not undress, in order that she might not be so cold.

Against her breast was pressed the doll, whose large eyes, wide open,
glittered in the dark.  From time to time she gave vent to a deep
sigh as though she were on the point of waking, and she strained
the doll almost convulsively in her arms.  Beside her bed there
was only one of her wooden shoes.

A door which stood open near Cosette's pallet permitted a view
of a rather large, dark room.  The stranger stepped into it. 
At the further extremity, through a glass door, he saw two small,
very white beds.  They belonged to Eponine and Azelma. 
Behind these beds, and half hidden, stood an uncurtained wicker cradle,
in which the little boy who had cried all the evening lay asleep.

The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of
the Thenardier pair.  He was on the point of retreating when his
eye fell upon the fireplace--one of those vast tavern chimneys
where there is always so little fire when there is any fire at all,
and which are so cold to look at.  There was no fire in this one,
there was not even ashes; but there was something which attracted
the stranger's gaze, nevertheless.  It was two tiny children's shoes,
coquettish in shape and unequal in size.  The traveller recalled
the graceful and immemorial custom in accordance with which children
place their shoes in the chimney on Christmas eve, there to await
in the darkness some sparkling gift from their good fairy. 
Eponine and Azelma had taken care not to omit this, and each of them
had set one of her shoes on the hearth.

The traveller bent over them.

The fairy, that is to say, their mother, had already paid her visit,
and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece.

The man straightened himself up, and was on the point of withdrawing,
when far in, in the darkest corner of the hearth, he caught sight
of another object.  He looked at it, and recognized a wooden shoe,
a frightful shoe of the coarsest description, half dilapidated
and all covered with ashes and dried mud.  It was Cosette's sabot. 
Cosette, with that touching trust of childhood, which can always
be deceived yet never discouraged, had placed her shoe on the
hearth-stone also.

Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet
and touching thing.

There was nothing in this wooden shoe.

The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat, bent over and placed a louis
d'or in Cosette's shoe.

Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf.



CHAPTER IX

THENARDIER AND HIS MANOEUVRES


On the following morning, two hours at least before day-break, Thenardier,
seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern, pen in hand,
was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat.

His wife, standing beside him, and half bent over him, was following
him with her eyes.  They exchanged not a word.  On the one hand,
there was profound meditation, on the other, the religious
admiration with which one watches the birth and development
of a marvel of the human mind.  A noise was audible in the house;
it was the Lark sweeping the stairs.

After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour, and some erasures,
Thenardier produced the following masterpiece:--

          BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1.

  Supper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3 francs.
  Chamber  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10   "
  Candle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5   "
  Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4   "
  Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1   "
                                          ----------
                     Total . . . . . .    23 francs.


Service was written servisse.

"Twenty-three francs!" cried the woman, with an enthusiasm which
was mingled with some hesitation.

Like all great artists, Thenardier was dissatisfied.

"Peuh!" he exclaimed.

It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France's bill at the
Congress of Vienna.

"Monsieur Thenardier, you are right; he certainly owes that,"
murmured the wife, who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette
in the presence of her daughters.  "It is just, but it is too much. 
He will not pay it."

Thenardier laughed coldly, as usual, and said:--

"He will pay."

This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority. 
That which was asserted in this manner must needs be so.  His wife did
not insist.

She set about arranging the table; her husband paced the room. 
A moment later he added:--

"I owe full fifteen hundred francs!"

He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner, meditating,
with his feet among the warm ashes.

"Ah! by the way," resumed his wife, "you don't forget that I'm
going to turn Cosette out of doors to-day? The monster!  She breaks
my heart with that doll of hers!  I'd rather marry Louis XVIII. 
than keep her another day in the house!"

Thenardier lighted his pipe, and replied between two puffs:--

"You will hand that bill to the man."

Then he went out.

Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered.

Thenardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless
in the half-open door, visible only to his wife.

The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand.

"Up so early?" said Madame Thenardier; "is Monsieur leaving us already?"

As she spoke thus, she was twisting the bill about in her hands
with an embarrassed air, and making creases in it with her nails. 
Her hard face presented a shade which was not habitual with it,--
timidity and scruples.

To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air "of
a poor wretch" seemed difficult to her.

The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded. He replied:--

"Yes, Madame, I am going."

"So Monsieur has no business in Montfermeil?"

"No, I was passing through.  That is all.  What do I owe you,
Madame," he added.

The Thenardier silently handed him the folded bill.

The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it; but his thoughts
were evidently elsewhere.

"Madame," he resumed, "is business good here in Montfermeil?"

"So so, Monsieur," replied the Thenardier, stupefied at not
witnessing another sort of explosion.

She continued, in a dreary and lamentable tone:--

"Oh!  Monsieur, times are so hard! and then, we have so few bourgeois
in the neighborhood!  All the people are poor, you see.  If we had not,
now and then, some rich and generous travellers like Monsieur,
we should not get along at all.  We have so many expenses.  Just see,
that child is costing us our very eyes."

"What child?"

"Why, the little one, you know!  Cosette--the Lark, as she
is called hereabouts!"

"Ah!" said the man.

She went on:--

"How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames!  She has more
the air of a bat than of a lark.  You see, sir, we do not ask charity,
and we cannot bestow it.  We earn nothing and we have to pay out
a great deal.  The license, the imposts, the door and window tax,
the hundredths!  Monsieur is aware that the government demands
a terrible deal of money.  And then, I have my daughters. 
I have no need to bring up other people's children."

The man resumed, in that voice which he strove to render indifferent,
and in which there lingered a tremor:--

"What if one were to rid you of her?"

"Who?  Cosette?"

"Yes."

The landlady's red and violent face brightened up hideously.

"Ah! sir, my dear sir, take her, keep her, lead her off,
carry her away, sugar her, stuff her with truffles, drink her,
eat her, and the blessings of the good holy Virgin and of all
the saints of paradise be upon you!"

"Agreed."

"Really!  You will take her away?"

"I will take her away."

"Immediately?"

"Immediately.  Call the child."

"Cosette!" screamed the Thenardier.

"In the meantime," pursued the man, "I will pay you what I owe you. 
How much is it?"

He cast a glance on the bill, and could not restrain a start
of surprise:--

"Twenty-three francs!"

He looked at the landlady, and repeated:--

"Twenty-three francs?"

There was in the enunciation of these words, thus repeated,
an accent between an exclamation and an interrogation point.

The Thenardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock. 
She replied, with assurance:--

"Good gracious, yes, sir, it is twenty-three francs."

The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table.

"Go and get the child," said he.

At that moment Thenardier advanced to the middle of the room,
and said:--

"Monsieur owes twenty-six sous."

"Twenty-six sous!" exclaimed his wife.

"Twenty sous for the chamber," resumed Thenardier, coldly, "and six
sous for his supper.  As for the child, I must discuss that matter
a little with the gentleman.  Leave us, wife."

Madame Thenardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpected
lightning flashes of talent.  She was conscious that a great actor
was making his entrance on the stage, uttered not a word in reply,
and left the room.

As soon as they were alone, Thenardier offered the traveller a chair. 
The traveller seated himself; Thenardier remained standing,
and his face assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship
and simplicity.

"Sir," said he, "what I have to say to you is this, that I adore
that child."

The stranger gazed intently at him.

"What child?"

Thenardier continued:--

"How strange it is, one grows attached.  What money is that? 
Take back your hundred-sou piece.  I adore the child."

"Whom do you mean?" demanded the stranger.

"Eh! our little Cosette!  Are you not intending to take her away
from us?  Well, I speak frankly; as true as you are an honest man,
I will not consent to it.  I shall miss that child.  I saw her first
when she was a tiny thing.  It is true that she costs us money;
it is true that she has her faults; it is true that we are not rich;
it is true that I have paid out over four hundred francs for
drugs for just one of her illnesses!  But one must do something
for the good God's sake.  She has neither father nor mother. 
I have brought her up.  I have bread enough for her and for myself. 
In truth, I think a great deal of that child.  You understand,
one conceives an affection for a person; I am a good sort of
a beast, I am; I do not reason; I love that little girl; my wife
is quick-tempered, but she loves her also.  You see, she is just
the same as our own child.  I want to keep her to babble about
the house."

The stranger kept his eye intently fixed on Thenardier. 
The latter continued:--

"Excuse me, sir, but one does not give away one's child to a
passer-by, like that.  I am right, am I not?  Still, I don't say--
you are rich; you have the air of a very good man,--if it were
for her happiness.  But one must find out that.  You understand: 
suppose that I were to let her go and to sacrifice myself,
I should like to know what becomes of her; I should not wish to
lose sight of her; I should like to know with whom she is living,
so that I could go to see her from time to time; so that she may know
that her good foster-father is alive, that he is watching over her. 
In short, there are things which are not possible.  I do not even
know your name.  If you were to take her away, I should say: 
`Well, and the Lark, what has become of her?'  One must, at least,
see some petty scrap of paper, some trifle in the way of a passport,
you know!"

The stranger, still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates,
as the saying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in
a grave, firm voice:--

"Monsieur Thenardier, one does not require a passport to travel five
leagues from Paris.  If I take Cosette away, I shall take her away,
and that is the end of the matter.  You will not know my name,
you will not know my residence, you will not know where she is;
and my intention is that she shall never set eyes on you again
so long as she lives.  I break the thread which binds her foot,
and she departs.  Does that suit you?  Yes or no?"

Since geniuses, like demons, recognize the presence of a superior
God by certain signs, Thenardier comprehended that he had to deal
with a very strong person.  It was like an intuition; he comprehended
it with his clear and sagacious promptitude.  While drinking with
the carters, smoking, and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening,
he had devoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger,
watching him like a cat, and studying him like a mathematician. 
He had watched him, both on his own account, for the pleasure of
the thing, and through instinct, and had spied upon him as though
he had been paid for so doing.  Not a movement, not a gesture,
on the part of the man in the yellow great-coat had escaped him. 
Even before the stranger had so clearly manifested his interest
in Cosette, Thenardier had divined his purpose.  He had caught
the old man's deep glances returning constantly to the child. 
Who was this man?  Why this interest?  Why this hideous costume,
when he had so much money in his purse?  Questions which he put to
himself without being able to solve them, and which irritated him. 
He had pondered it all night long.  He could not be Cosette's father. 
Was he her grandfather?  Then why not make himself known at once? 
When one has a right, one asserts it.  This man evidently had no
right over Cosette.  What was it, then?  Thenardier lost himself
in conjectures.  He caught glimpses of everything, but he saw nothing. 
Be that as it may, on entering into conversation with the man,
sure that there was some secret in the case, that the latter had
some interest in remaining in the shadow, he felt himself strong;
when he perceived from the stranger's clear and firm retort,
that this mysterious personage was mysterious in so simple a way,
he became conscious that he was weak.  He had expected nothing
of the sort.  His conjectures were put to the rout.  He rallied
his ideas.  He weighed everything in the space of a second. 
Thenardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance. 
He decided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward,
and quickly at that.  He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment,
which they know that they alone recognize; he abruptly unmasked his
batteries.

"Sir," said he, "I am in need of fifteen hundred francs."

The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black leather,
opened it, drew out three bank-bills, which he laid on the table. 
Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the inn-keeper:--

"Go and fetch Cosette."

While this was taking place, what had Cosette been doing?

On waking up, Cosette had run to get her shoe.  In it she had
found the gold piece.  It was not a Napoleon; it was one of those
perfectly new twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration, on whose
effigy the little Prussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath. 
Cosette was dazzled.  Her destiny began to intoxicate her. 
She did not know what a gold piece was; she had never seen one;
she hid it quickly in her pocket, as though she had stolen it. 
Still, she felt that it really was hers; she guessed whence her gift
had come, but the joy which she experienced was full of fear. 
She was happy; above all she was stupefied.  Such magnificent
and beautiful things did not appear real.  The doll frightened her,
the gold piece frightened her.  She trembled vaguely in the presence
of this magnificence.  The stranger alone did not frighten her. 
On the contrary, he reassured her.  Ever since the preceding evening,
amid all her amazement, even in her sleep, she had been thinking
in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be so poor
and so sad, and who was so rich and so kind.  Everything had
changed for her since she had met that good man in the forest. 
Cosette, less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven,
had never known what it was to take refuge under a mother's shadow
and under a wing.  For the last five years, that is to say, as far
back as her memory ran, the poor child had shivered and trembled. 
She had always been exposed completely naked to the sharp wind
of adversity; now it seemed to her she was clothed.  Formerly her
soul had seemed cold, now it was warm.  Cosette was no longer
afraid of the Thenardier.  She was no longer alone; there was some
one there.

She hastily set about her regular morning duties.  That louis,
which she had about her, in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou
piece had fallen on the night before, distracted her thoughts. 
She dared not touch it, but she spent five minutes in gazing at it,
with her tongue hanging out, if the truth must be told.  As she
swept the staircase, she paused, remained standing there motionless,
forgetful of her broom and of the entire universe, occupied in gazing
at that star which was blazing at the bottom of her pocket.

It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the
Thenardier joined her.  She had gone in search of Cosette at her
husband's orders.  What was quite unprecedented, she neither
struck her nor said an insulting word to her.

"Cosette," she said, almost gently, "come immediately."

An instant later Cosette entered the public room.

The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it. 
This bundle contained a little woollen gown, an apron, a fustian bodice,
a kerchief, a petticoat, woollen stockings, shoes--a complete outfit
for a girl of seven years.  All was black.

"My child," said the man, "take these, and go and dress yourself quickly."

Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil
who had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man
leading a little girl dressed in mourning, and carrying a pink
doll in her arms, pass along the road to Paris.  They were going
in the direction of Livry.

It was our man and Cosette.

No one knew the man; as Cosette was no longer in rags, many did
not recognize her.  Cosette was going away.  With whom?  She did
not know.  Whither?  She knew not.  All that she understood was
that she was leaving the Thenardier tavern behind her.  No one had
thought of bidding her farewell, nor had she thought of taking
leave of any one.  She was leaving that hated and hating house.

Poor, gentle creature, whose heart had been repressed up to that hour!

Cosette walked along gravely, with her large eyes wide open,
and gazing at the sky.  She had put her louis in the pocket of her
new apron.  From time to time, she bent down and glanced at it;
then she looked at the good man.  She felt something as though she
were beside the good God.



CHAPTER X

HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION WORSE


Madame Thenardier had allowed her husband to have his own way,
as was her wont.  She had expected great results.  When the man
and Cosette had taken their departure, Thenardier allowed a full
quarter of an hour to elapse; then he took her aside and showed
her the fifteen hundred francs.

"Is that all?" said she.

It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she
had dared to criticise one of the master's acts.

The blow told.

"You are right, in sooth," said he; "I am a fool.  Give me my hat."

He folded up the three bank-bills, thrust them into his pocket, and ran
out in all haste; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first. 
Some neighbors, of whom he made inquiries, put him on the track again;
the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry. 
He followed these hints, walking with great strides, and talking
to himself the while:--

"That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow, and I am an animal. 
First he gave twenty sous, then five francs, then fifty francs,
then fifteen hundred francs, all with equal readiness.  He would
have given fifteen thousand francs.  But I shall overtake him."

And then, that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child;
all that was singular; many mysteries lay concealed under it. 
One does not let mysteries out of one's hand when one has once
grasped them.  The secrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold;
one must know how to subject them to pressure.  All these thoughts
whirled through his brain.  "I am an animal," said he.

When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road
takes that runs to Livry, it can be seen stretching out before
one to a great distance across the plateau.  On arriving there,
he calculated that he ought to be able to see the old man and
the child.  He looked as far as his vision reached, and saw nothing. 
He made fresh inquiries, but he had wasted time.  Some passers-by
informed him that the man and child of whom he was in search had
gone towards the forest in the direction of Gagny.  He hastened
in that direction.

They were far in advance of him; but a child walks slowly, and he
walked fast; and then, he was well acquainted with the country.

All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead
like a man who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready
to retrace his steps.

"I ought to have taken my gun," said he to himself.

Thenardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass
through our midst without our being aware of the fact, and who
disappear without our finding them out, because destiny has only
exhibited one side of them.  It is the fate of many men to live
thus half submerged.  In a calm and even situation, Thenardier
possessed all that is required to make--we will not say to be--
what people have agreed to call an honest trader, a good bourgeois. 
At the same time certain circumstances being given, certain shocks
arriving to bring his under-nature to the surface, he had all
the requisites for a blackguard.  He was a shopkeeper in whom
there was some taint of the monster.  Satan must have occasionally
crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which Thenardier dwelt,
and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous masterpiece.

After a momentary hesitation:--

"Bah!" he thought; "they will have time to make their escape."

And he pursued his road, walking rapidly straight ahead, and with
almost an air of certainty, with the sagacity of a fox scenting
a covey of partridges.

In truth, when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an oblique
direction the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue
de Bellevue, and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit
of the hill, and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey
of Chelles, he caught sight, over the top of the brushwood, of the hat
on which he had already erected so many conjectures; it was that
man's hat.  The brushwood was not high.  Thenardier recognized the fact
that the man and Cosette were sitting there.  The child could not be
seen on account of her small size, but the head of her doll was visible.

Thenardier was not mistaken.  The man was sitting there,
and letting Cosette get somewhat rested.  The inn-keeper walked
round the brushwood and presented himself abruptly to the eyes
of those whom he was in search of.

"Pardon, excuse me, sir," he said, quite breathless, "but here
are your fifteen hundred francs."

So saying, he handed the stranger the three bank-bills.

The man raised his eyes.

"What is the meaning of this?"

Thenardier replied respectfully:--

"It means, sir, that I shall take back Cosette."

Cosette shuddered, and pressed close to the old man.

He replied, gazing to the very bottom of Thenardier's eyes the while,
and enunciating every syllable distinctly:--

"You are go-ing to take back Co-sette?"

"Yes, sir, I am.  I will tell you; I have considered the matter. 
In fact, I have not the right to give her to you.  I am an honest man,
you see; this child does not belong to me; she belongs to her mother. 
It was her mother who confided her to me; I can only resign her
to her mother.  You will say to me, `But her mother is dead.' 
Good; in that case I can only give the child up to the person
who shall bring me a writing, signed by her mother, to the effect
that I am to hand the child over to the person therein mentioned;
that is clear."

The man, without making any reply, fumbled in his pocket, and Thenardier
beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance once more.

The tavern-keeper shivered with joy.

"Good!" thought he; "let us hold firm; he is going to bribe me!"

Before opening the pocket-book, the traveller cast a glance about him: 
the spot was absolutely deserted; there was not a soul either in the
woods or in the valley.  The man opened his pocket-book once more
and drew from it, not the handful of bills which Thenardier expected,
but a simple little paper, which he unfolded and presented fully
open to the inn-keeper, saying:--

"You are right; read!"

Thenardier took the paper and read:--

                              "M. SUR M., March 25, 1823.

"MONSIEUR THENARDIER:--
               You will deliver Cosette to this person.
               You will be paid for all the little things.
               I have the honor to salute you with respect,
                                                  FANTINE."

"You know that signature?" resumed the man.

It certainly was Fantine's signature; Thenardier recognized it.

There was no reply to make; he experienced two violent vexations,
the vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for,
and the vexation of being beaten; the man added:--

"You may keep this paper as your receipt."

Thenardier retreated in tolerably good order.

"This signature is fairly well imitated," he growled between his teeth;
"however, let it go!"

Then he essayed a desperate effort.

"It is well, sir," he said, "since you are the person, but I must
be paid for all those little things.  A great deal is owing to me."

The man rose to his feet, filliping the dust from his thread-bare sleeve:--

"Monsieur Thenardier, in January last, the mother reckoned that she owed
you one hundred and twenty francs.  In February, you sent her a bill
of five hundred francs; you received three hundred francs at the end
of February, and three hundred francs at the beginning of March. 
Since then nine months have elapsed, at fifteen francs a month,
the price agreed upon, which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs. 
You had received one hundred francs too much; that makes thirty-five
still owing you.  I have just given you fifteen hundred francs."

Thenardier's sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when he
feels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap.

"Who is this devil of a man?" he thought.

He did what the wolf does:  he shook himself.  Audacity had succeeded
with him once.

"Monsieur-I-don't-know-your-name," he said resolutely, and this
time casting aside all respectful ceremony, "I shall take back
Cosette if you do not give me a thousand crowns."

The stranger said tranquilly:--

"Come, Cosette."

He took Cosette by his left hand, and with his right he picked up
his cudgel, which was lying on the ground.

Thenardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude
of the spot.

The man plunged into the forest with the child, leaving the inn-keeper
motionless and speechless.

While they were walking away, Thenardier scrutinized his huge shoulders,
which were a little rounded, and his great fists.

Then, bringing his eyes back to his own person, they fell upon his
feeble arms and his thin hands.  "I really must have been exceedingly
stupid not to have thought to bring my gun," he said to himself,
"since I was going hunting!"

However, the inn-keeper did not give up.

"I want to know where he is going," said he, and he set out to
follow them at a distance.  Two things were left on his hands,
an irony in the shape of the paper signed Fantine, and a consolation,
the fifteen hundred francs.

The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy. 
He walked slowly, with drooping head, in an attitude of reflection
and sadness.  The winter had thinned out the forest, so that Thenardier
did not lose them from sight, although he kept at a good distance. 
The man turned round from time to time, and looked to see if he
was being followed.  All at once he caught sight of Thenardier. 
He plunged suddenly into the brushwood with Cosette, where they could
both hide themselves.  "The deuce!" said Thenardier, and he redoubled
his pace.

The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them. 
When the man had reached the densest part of the thicket,
he wheeled round.  It was in vain that Thenardier sought to conceal
himself in the branches; he could not prevent the man seeing him. 
The man cast upon him an uneasy glance, then elevated his head
and continued his course.  The inn-keeper set out again in pursuit. 
Thus they continued for two or three hundred paces.  All at once
the man turned round once more; he saw the inn-keeper. This time
he gazed at him with so sombre an air that Thenardier decided
that it was "useless" to proceed further.  Thenardier retraced
his steps.



CHAPTER XI

NUMBER 9,430 REAPPEARS, AND COSETTE WINS IT IN THE LOTTERY


Jean Valjean was not dead.

When he fell into the sea, or rather, when he threw himself into it,
he was not ironed, as we have seen.  He swam under water until
he reached a vessel at anchor, to which a boat was moored. 
He found means of hiding himself in this boat until night. 
At night he swam off again, and reached the shore a little way from
Cape Brun.  There, as he did not lack money, he procured clothing. 
A small country-house in the neighborhood of Balaguier was at that
time the dressing-room of escaped convicts,--a lucrative specialty. 
Then Jean Valjean, like all the sorry fugitives who are seeking to
evade the vigilance of the law and social fatality, pursued an obscure
and undulating itinerary.  He found his first refuge at Pradeaux,
near Beausset.  Then he directed his course towards Grand-Villard,
near Briancon, in the Hautes-Alpes. It was a fumbling and uneasy flight,--
a mole's track, whose branchings are untraceable.  Later on, some trace
of his passage into Ain, in the territory of Civrieux, was discovered;
in the Pyrenees, at Accons; at the spot called Grange-de-Doumec,
near the market of Chavailles, and in the environs of Perigueux
at Brunies, canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet. He reached Paris. 
We have just seen him at Montfermeil.

His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothes
for a little girl of from seven to eight years of age; then to procure
a lodging.  That done, he had betaken himself to Montfermeil. 
It will be remembered that already, during his preceding escape,
he had made a mysterious trip thither, or somewhere in that neighborhood,
of which the law had gathered an inkling.

However, he was thought to be dead, and this still further
increased the obscurity which had gathered about him.  At Paris,
one of the journals which chronicled the fact fell into his hands. 
He felt reassured and almost at peace, as though he had really
been dead.

On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from
the claws of the Thenardiers, he returned to Paris.  He re-entered
it at nightfall, with the child, by way of the Barrier Monceaux. 
There he entered a cabriolet, which took him to the esplanade
of the Observatoire.  There he got out, paid the coachman,
took Cosette by the hand, and together they directed their steps
through the darkness,--through the deserted streets which adjoin
the Ourcine and the Glaciere, towards the Boulevard de l'Hopital.

The day had been strange and filled with emotions for Cosette. 
They had eaten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns,
behind hedges; they had changed carriages frequently; they had
travelled short distances on foot.  She made no complaint, but she
was weary, and Jean Valjean perceived it by the way she dragged
more and more on his hand as she walked.  He took her on his back. 
Cosette, without letting go of Catherine, laid her head on Jean
Valjean's shoulder, and there fell asleep.



BOOK FOURTH.--THE GORBEAU HOVEL



CHAPTER I

MASTER GORBEAU


Forty years ago, a rambler who had ventured into that unknown
country of the Salpetriere, and who had mounted to the Barriere
d'Italie by way of the boulevard, reached a point where it might
be said that Paris disappeared.  It was no longer solitude,
for there were passers-by; it was not the country, for there were
houses and streets; it was not the city, for the streets had ruts
like highways, and the grass grew in them; it was not a village,
the houses were too lofty.  What was it, then?  It was an inhabited
spot where there was no one; it was a desert place where there was
some one; it was a boulevard of the great city, a street of Paris;
more wild at night than the forest, more gloomy by day than a cemetery.

It was the old quarter of the Marche-aux-Chevaux.

The rambler, if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls
of this Marche-aux-Chevaux; if he consented even to pass beyond
the Rue du Petit-Banquier, after leaving on his right a garden
protected by high walls; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose
like gigantic beaver huts; then an enclosure encumbered with timber,
with a heap of stumps, sawdust, and shavings, on which stood
a large dog, barking; then a long, low, utterly dilapidated wall,
with a little black door in mourning, laden with mosses,
which were covered with flowers in the spring; then, in the most
deserted spot, a frightful and decrepit building, on which ran
the inscription in large letters:  POST NO BILLS,--this daring
rambler would have reached little known latitudes at the corner
of the Rue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel. There, near a factory,
and between two garden walls, there could be seen, at that epoch,
a mean building, which, at the first glance, seemed as small as a
thatched hovel, and which was, in reality, as large as a cathedral. 
It presented its side and gable to the public road; hence its
apparent diminutiveness.  Nearly the whole of the house was hidden. 
Only the door and one window could be seen.

This hovel was only one story high.

The first detail that struck the observer was, that the door could
never have been anything but the door of a hovel, while the window,
if it had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in
rough masonry, might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion.

The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly
bound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs. 
It opened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps, muddy,
chalky, plaster-stained, dusty steps, of the same width as itself,
which could be seen from the street, running straight up like a
ladder and disappearing in the darkness between two walls.  The top
of the shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow
scantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed,
which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed. 
On the inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a
couple of strokes of a brush dipped in ink, and above the scantling
the same hand had daubed the number 50, so that one hesitated. 
Where was one?  Above the door it said, "Number 50"; the inside replied,
"no, Number 52."  No one knows what dust-colored figures were
suspended like draperies from the triangular opening.

The window was large, sufficiently elevated, garnished with
Venetian blinds, and with a frame in large square panes;
only these large panes were suffering from various wounds,
which were both concealed and betrayed by an ingenious paper bandage. 
And the blinds, dislocated and unpasted, threatened passers-by
rather than screened the occupants.  The horizontal slats were
missing here and there and had been naively replaced with boards
nailed on perpendicularly; so that what began as a blind ended
as a shutter.  This door with an unclean, and this window with
an honest though dilapidated air, thus beheld on the same house,
produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side,
with different miens beneath the same rags, the one having
always been a mendicant, and the other having once been a gentleman.

The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed
which had been converted into a house.  This edifice had, for its
intestinal tube, a long corridor, on which opened to right and left
sorts of compartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable
under stress of circumstances, and rather more like stalls than cells. 
These chambers received their light from the vague waste grounds
in the neighborhood.

All this was dark, disagreeable, wan, melancholy, sepulchral;
traversed according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door,
by cold rays or by icy winds.  An interesting and picturesque
peculiarity of this sort of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders.

To the left of the entrance door, on the boulevard side, at about
the height of a man from the ground, a small window which had been
walled up formed a square niche full of stones which the children
had thrown there as they passed by.

A portion of this building has recently been demolished. 
From what still remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it
was in former days.  As a whole, it was not over a hundred years old. 
A hundred years is youth in a church and age in a house. 
It seems as though man's lodging partook of his ephemeral character,
and God's house of his eternity.

The postmen called the house Number 50-52; but it was known
in the neighborhood as the Gorbeau house.

Let us explain whence this appellation was derived.

Collectors of petty details, who become herbalists of anecdotes,
and prick slippery dates into their memories with a pin,
know that there was in Paris, during the last century, about 1770,
two attorneys at the Chatelet named, one Corbeau (Raven), the other
Renard (Fox). The two names had been forestalled by La Fontaine. 
The opportunity was too fine for the lawyers; they made the most of it. 
A parody was immediately put in circulation in the galleries of the
court-house, in verses that limped a little:--


          Maitre Corbeau, sur un dossier perche,[13]
               Tenait dans son bee une saisie executoire;
          Maitre Renard, par l'odeur alleche,
               Lui fit a peu pres cette histoire:
                    He! bonjour.  Etc.

[13] Lawyer Corbeau, perched on a docket, held in his beak a writ
of execution; Lawyer Renard, attracted by the smell, addressed him
nearly as follows, etc.


The two honest practitioners, embarrassed by the jests, and finding
the bearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter
which followed them, resolved to get rid of their names, and hit
upon the expedient of applying to the king.

Their petition was presented to Louis XV.  on the same day when the
Papal Nuncio, on the one hand, and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on
the other, both devoutly kneeling, were each engaged in putting on,
in his Majesty's presence, a slipper on the bare feet of Madame
du Barry, who had just got out of bed.  The king, who was laughing,
continued to laugh, passed gayly from the two bishops to the two
lawyers, and bestowed on these limbs of the law their former names,
or nearly so.  By the kings command, Maitre Corbeau was permitted
to add a tail to his initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau. 
Maitre Renard was less lucky; all he obtained was leave to place a P
in front of his R, and to call himself Prenard; so that the second
name bore almost as much resemblance as the first.

Now, according to local tradition, this Maitre Gorbeau had been
the proprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard de
l'Hopital. He was even the author of the monumental window.

Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house.

Opposite this house, among the trees of the boulevard, rose a great elm
which was three-quarters dead; almost directly facing it opens the Rue de
la Barriere des Gobelins, a street then without houses, unpaved, planted
with unhealthy trees, which was green or muddy according to the season,
and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris.  An odor
of copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory.

The barrier was close at hand.  In 1823 the city wall was still
in existence.

This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind.  It was
the road to Bicetre.  It was through it that, under the Empire
and the Restoration, prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris
on the day of their execution.  It was there, that, about 1829,
was committed that mysterious assassination, called "The assassination
of the Fontainebleau barrier," whose authors justice was never able
to discover; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated,
a frightful enigma which has never been unriddled.  Take a few steps,
and you come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe, where Ulbach stabbed
the goat-girl of Ivry to the sound of thunder, as in the melodramas. 
A few paces more, and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms
of the Barriere Saint-Jacques, that expedient of the philanthropist
to conceal the scaffold, that miserable and shameful Place de Grove
of a shop-keeping and bourgeois society, which recoiled before
the death penalty, neither daring to abolish it with grandeur,
nor to uphold it with authority.

Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques, which was, as it were,
predestined, and which has always been horrible, probably the
most mournful spot on that mournful boulevard, seven and thirty
years ago, was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive,
where stood the building Number 50-52.

Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later. 
The place was unpleasant.  In addition to the gloomy thoughts which
assailed one there, one was conscious of being between the Salpetriere,
a glimpse of whose dome could be seen, and Bicetre, whose outskirts
one was fairly touching; that is to say, between the madness of women
and the madness of men.  As far as the eye could see, one could
perceive nothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and the fronts of
a few factories, resembling barracks or monasteries; everywhere about
stood hovels, rubbish, ancient walls blackened like cerecloths,
new white walls like winding-sheets; everywhere parallel rows of trees,
buildings erected on a line, flat constructions, long, cold rows,
and the melancholy sadness of right angles.  Not an unevenness
of the ground, not a caprice in the architecture, not a fold. 
The ensemble was glacial, regular, hideous.  Nothing oppresses
the heart like symmetry.  It is because symmetry is ennui,
and ennui is at the very foundation of grief.  Despair yawns. 
Something more terrible than a hell where one suffers may be imagined,
and that is a hell where one is bored.  If such a hell existed,
that bit of the Boulevard de l'Hopital might have formed the entrance
to it.

Nevertheless, at nightfall, at the moment when the daylight
is vanishing, especially in winter, at the hour when the twilight
breeze tears from the elms their last russet leaves, when the
darkness is deep and starless, or when the moon and the wind are
making openings in the clouds and losing themselves in the shadows,
this boulevard suddenly becomes frightful.  The black lines sink
inwards and are lost in the shades, like morsels of the infinite. 
The passer-by cannot refrain from recalling the innumerable
traditions of the place which are connected with the gibbet. 
The solitude of this spot, where so many crimes have been committed,
had something terrible about it.  One almost had a presentiment
of meeting with traps in that darkness; all the confused forms
of the darkness seemed suspicious, and the long, hollow square,
of which one caught a glimpse between each tree, seemed graves: 
by day it was ugly; in the evening melancholy; by night it
was sinister.

In summer, at twilight, one saw, here and there, a few old women
seated at the foot of the elm, on benches mouldy with rain. 
These good old women were fond of begging.

However, this quarter, which had a superannuated rather than an
antique air, was tending even then to transformation.  Even at
that time any one who was desirous of seeing it had to make haste. 
Each day some detail of the whole effect was disappearing. 
For the last twenty years the station of the Orleans railway
has stood beside the old faubourg and distracted it, as it does
to-day. Wherever it is placed on the borders of a capital,
a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth of a city. 
It seems as though, around these great centres of the movements
of a people, the earth, full of germs, trembled and yawned, to engulf
the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to spring forth,
at the rattle of these powerful machines, at the breath of these
monstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire. 
The old houses crumble and new ones rise.

Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpetriere,
the ancient, narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor
and the Jardin des Plantes tremble, as they are violently traversed
three or four times each day by those currents of coach fiacres
and omnibuses which, in a given time, crowd back the houses
to the right and the left; for there are things which are odd
when said that are rigorously exact; and just as it is true to say
that in large cities the sun makes the southern fronts of houses
to vegetate and grow, it is certain that the frequent passage of
vehicles enlarges streets.  The symptoms of a new life are evident. 
In this old provincial quarter, in the wildest nooks, the pavement
shows itself, the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow longer,
even where there are as yet no pedestrians.  One morning,--a memorable
morning in July, 1845,--black pots of bitumen were seen smoking there;
on that day it might be said that civilization had arrived in the Rue
de l'Ourcine, and that Paris had entered the suburb of Saint-Marceau.



CHAPTER II

A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER


It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted. 
Like wild birds, he had chosen this desert place to construct
his nest.

He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, drew out a sort of a pass-key,
opened the door, entered, closed it again carefully, and ascended
the staircase, still carrying Cosette.

At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key,
with which he opened another door.  The chamber which he entered,
and which he closed again instantly, was a kind of moderately
spacious attic, furnished with a mattress laid on the floor,
a table, and several chairs; a stove in which a fire was burning,
and whose embers were visible, stood in one corner.  A lantern
on the boulevard cast a vague light into this poor room. 
At the extreme end there was a dressing-room with a folding bed;
Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laid her down there
without waking her.

He struck a match and lighted a candle.  All this was prepared
beforehand on the table, and, as he had done on the previous evening,
he began to scrutinize Cosette's face with a gaze full of ecstasy,
in which the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted
to aberration.  The little girl, with that tranquil confidence
which belongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness,
had fallen asleep without knowing with whom she was, and continued
to sleep without knowing where she was.

Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child's hand.

Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother, who had
also just fallen asleep.

The same sad, piercing, religious sentiment filled his heart.

He knelt beside Cosette's bed.

lt was broad daylight, and the child still slept.  A wan ray
of the December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay
upon the ceiling in long threads of light and shade.  All at once
a heavily laden carrier's cart, which was passing along the boulevard,
shook the frail bed, like a clap of thunder, and made it quiver
from top to bottom.

"Yes, madame!" cried Cosette, waking with a start, "here I am!
here I am!"

And she sprang out of bed, her eyes still half shut with the heaviness
of sleep, extending her arms towards the corner of the wall.

"Ah! mon Dieu, my broom!" said she.

She opened her eyes wide now, and beheld the smiling countenance
of Jean Valjean.

"Ah! so it is true!" said the child.  "Good morning, Monsieur."

Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly,
being themselves by nature joy and happiness.

Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed,
and took possession of her, and, as she played, she put a hundred
questions to Jean Valjean.  Where was she?  Was Paris very large? 
Was Madame Thenardier very far away?  Was she to go back? etc., etc. 
All at once she exclaimed, "How pretty it is here!"

It was a frightful hole, but she felt free.

"Must I sweep?" she resumed at last.

"Play!" said Jean Valjean.

The day passed thus.  Cosette, without troubling herself to understand
anything, was inexpressibly happy with that doll and that kind man.



CHAPTER III

TWO MISFORTUNES MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE


On the following morning, at daybreak, Jean Valjean was still by
Cosette's bedside; he watched there motionless, waiting for her to wake.

Some new thing had come into his soul.

Jean Valjean had never loved anything; for twenty-five years he had been
alone in the world.  He had never been father, lover, husband, friend. 
In the prison he had been vicious, gloomy, chaste, ignorant,
and shy.  The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity. 
His sister and his sister's children had left him only a vague
and far-off memory which had finally almost completely vanished;
he had made every effort to find them, and not having been able
to find them, he had forgotten them.  Human nature is made thus;
the other tender emotions of his youth, if he had ever had any,
had fallen into an abyss.

When he saw Cosette, when he had taken possession of her,
carried her off, and delivered her, he felt his heart moved within him.

All the passion and affection within him awoke, and rushed towards
that child.  He approached the bed, where she lay sleeping,
and trembled with joy.  He suffered all the pangs of a mother,
and he knew not what it meant; for that great and singular movement
of a heart which begins to love is a very obscure and a very sweet thing.

Poor old man, with a perfectly new heart!

Only, as he was five and fifty, and Cosette eight years of age,
all that might have been love in the whole course of his life flowed
together into a sort of ineffable light.

It was the second white apparition which he had encountered. 
The Bishop had caused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon;
Cosette caused the dawn of love to rise.

The early days passed in this dazzled state.

Cosette, on her side, had also, unknown to herself, become another
being, poor little thing!  She was so little when her mother
left her, that she no longer remembered her.  Like all children,
who resemble young shoots of the vine, which cling to everything,
she had tried to love; she had not succeeded.  All had repulsed her,--
the Thenardiers, their children, other children.  She had loved the dog,
and he had died, after which nothing and nobody would have anything
to do with her.  It is a sad thing to say, and we have already
intimated it, that, at eight years of age, her heart was cold. 
It was not her fault; it was not the faculty of loving that she lacked;
alas! it was the possibility.  Thus, from the very first day,
all her sentient and thinking powers loved this kind man.  She felt
that which she had never felt before--a sensation of expansion.

The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor;
she thought Jean Valjean handsome, just as she thought the hovel pretty.

These are the effects of the dawn, of childhood, of joy.  The novelty
of the earth and of life counts for something here.  Nothing is
so charming as the coloring reflection of happiness on a garret. 
We all have in our past a delightful garret.

Nature, a difference of fifty years, had set a profound gulf
between Jean Valjean and Cosette; destiny filled in this gulf. 
Destiny suddenly united and wedded with its irresistible power
these two uprooted existences, differing in age, alike in sorrow. 
One, in fact, completed the other.  Cosette's instinct sought a father,
as Jean Valjean's instinct sought a child.  To meet was to find
each other.  At the mysterious moment when their hands touched,
they were welded together.  When these two souls perceived each other,
they recognized each other as necessary to each other, and embraced
each other closely.

Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense,
we may say that, separated from every one by the walls of the tomb,
Jean Valjean was the widower, and Cosette was the orphan: 
this situation caused Jean Valjean to become Cosette's father after
a celestial fashion.

And in truth, the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in
the depths of the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean
grasping hers in the dark was not an illusion, but a reality. 
The entrance of that man into the destiny of that child had been
the advent of God.

Moreover, Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well.  There he seemed
perfectly secure.

The chamber with a dressing-room, which he occupied with Cosette,
was the one whose window opened on the boulevard.  This being the
only window in the house, no neighbors' glances were to be feared
from across the way or at the side.

The ground-floor of Number 50-52, a sort of dilapidated penthouse,
served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners, and no communication
existed between it and the first story.  It was separated by
the flooring, which had neither traps nor stairs, and which formed
the diaphragm of the building, as it were.  The first story contained,
as we have said, numerous chambers and several attics, only one
of which was occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean
Valjean's housekeeping; all the rest was uninhabited.

It was this old woman, ornamented with the name of the principal
lodger, and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress,
who had let him the lodging on Christmas eve.  He had represented
himself to her as a gentleman of means who had been ruined by
Spanish bonds, who was coming there to live with his little daughter. 
He had paid her six months in advance, and had commissioned the old
woman to furnish the chamber and dressing-room, as we have seen. 
It was this good woman who had lighted the fire in the stove,
and prepared everything on the evening of their arrival.

Week followed week; these two beings led a happy life in that hovel.

Cosette laughed, chattered, and sang from daybreak.  Children have
their morning song as well as birds.

It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand,
all cracked with chilblains, and kissed it.  The poor child,
who was used to being beaten, did not know the meaning of this,
and ran away in confusion.

At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown. 
Cosette was no longer in rags; she was in mourning.  She had emerged
from misery, and she was entering into life.

Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read.  Sometimes, as he
made the child spell, he remembered that it was with the idea
of doing evil that he had learned to read in prison.  This idea
had ended in teaching a child to read.  Then the ex-convict smiled
with the pensive smile of the angels.

He felt in it a premeditation from on high, the will of some one
who was not man, and he became absorbed in revery.  Good thoughts
have their abysses as well as evil ones.

To teach Cosette to read, and to let her play, this constituted
nearly the whole of Jean Valjean's existence.  And then he talked
of her mother, and he made her pray.

She called him father, and knew no other name for him.

He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll,
and in listening to her prattle.  Life, henceforth, appeared to
him to be full of interest; men seemed to him good and just;
he no longer reproached any one in thought; he saw no reason why he
should not live to be a very old man, now that this child loved him. 
He saw a whole future stretching out before him, illuminated by
Cosette as by a charming light.  The best of us are not exempt from
egotistical thoughts.  At times, he reflected with a sort of joy
that she would be ugly.

This is only a personal opinion; but, to utter our whole thought,
at the point where Jean Valjean had arrived when he began to love Cosette,
it is by no means clear to us that he did not need this encouragement
in order that he might persevere in well-doing. He had just viewed
the malice of men and the misery of society under a new aspect--
incomplete aspects, which unfortunately only exhibited one side
of the truth, the fate of woman as summed up in Fantine, and public
authority as personified in Javert.  He had returned to prison,
this time for having done right; he had quaffed fresh bitterness;
disgust and lassitude were overpowering him; even the memory of the
Bishop probably suffered a temporary eclipse, though sure to reappear
later on luminous and triumphant; but, after all, that sacred
memory was growing dim.  Who knows whether Jean Valjean had not
been on the eve of growing discouraged and of falling once more? 
He loved and grew strong again.  Alas! he walked with no less
indecision than Cosette.  He protected her, and she strengthened him. 
Thanks to him, she could walk through life; thanks to her,
he could continue in virtue.  He was that child's stay, and she
was his prop.  Oh, unfathomable and divine mystery of the balances
of destiny!



CHAPTER IV

THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT


Jean Valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day. 
Every evening, at twilight, he walked for an hour or two,
sometimes alone, often with Cosette, seeking the most deserted
side alleys of the boulevard, and entering churches at nightfall. 
He liked to go to Saint-Medard, which is the nearest church. 
When he did not take Cosette with him, she remained with the old woman;
but the child's delight was to go out with the good man.  She preferred
an hour with him to all her rapturous tete-a-tetes with Catherine. 
He held her hand as they walked, and said sweet things to her.

It turned out that Cosette was a very gay little person.

The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went
to market.

They lived soberly, always having a little fire, but like people
in very moderate circumstances.  Jean Valjean had made no alterations
in the furniture as it was the first day; he had merely had the glass
door leading to Cosette's dressing-room replaced by a solid door.

He still wore his yellow coat, his black breeches, and his old hat. 
In the street, he was taken for a poor man.  It sometimes happened
that kind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him. 
Jean Valjean accepted the sou with a deep bow.  It also happened
occasionally that he encountered some poor wretch asking alms;
then he looked behind him to make sure that no one was observing him,
stealthily approached the unfortunate man, put a piece of money
into his hand, often a silver coin, and walked rapidly away. 
This had its disadvantages.  He began to be known in the neighborhood
under the name of the beggar who gives alms.

The old principal lodger, a cross-looking creature, who was
thoroughly permeated, so far as her neighbors were concerned, with the
inquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons, scrutinized Jean Valjean
a great deal, without his suspecting the fact.  She was a little deaf,
which rendered her talkative.  There remained to her from her past,
two teeth,--one above, the other below,--which she was continually
knocking against each other.  She had questioned Cosette, who had
not been able to tell her anything, since she knew nothing herself
except that she had come from Montfermeil.  One morning, this spy saw
Jean Valjean, with an air which struck the old gossip as peculiar,
entering one of the uninhabited compartments of the hovel. 
She followed him with the step of an old cat, and was able to observe
him without being seen, through a crack in the door, which was directly
opposite him.  Jean Valjean had his back turned towards this door,
by way of greater security, no doubt.  The old woman saw him fumble
in his pocket and draw thence a case, scissors, and thread; then he
began to rip the lining of one of the skirts of his coat, and from
the opening he took a bit of yellowish paper, which he unfolded. 
The old woman recognized, with terror, the fact that it was
a bank-bill for a thousand francs.  It was the second or third
only that she had seen in the course of her existence.  She fled in alarm.

A moment later, Jean Valjean accosted her, and asked her to go
and get this thousand-franc bill changed for him, adding that it
was his quarterly income, which he had received the day before. 
"Where?" thought the old woman.  "He did not go out until six
o'clock in the evening, and the government bank certainly is not
open at that hour."  The old woman went to get the bill changed,
and mentioned her surmises.  That thousand-franc note, commented on
and multiplied, produced a vast amount of terrified discussion among
the gossips of the Rue des Vignes Saint-Marcel.

A few days later, it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood,
in his shirt-sleeves, in the corridor.  The old woman was in the chamber,
putting things in order.  She was alone.  Cosette was occupied
in admiring the wood as it was sawed.  The old woman caught sight
of the coat hanging on a nail, and examined it.  The lining had been
sewed up again.  The good woman felt of it carefully, and thought
she observed in the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper. 
More thousand-franc bank-bills, no doubt!

She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets. 
Not only the needles, thread, and scissors which she had seen, but a
big pocket-book, a very large knife, and--a suspicious circumstance--
several wigs of various colors.  Each pocket of this coat had the air
of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents.

Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter.



CHAPTER V


A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT


Near Saint-Medard's church there was a poor man who was in the habit
of crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned,
and on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity.  He never passed
this man without giving him a few sous.  Sometimes he spoke to him. 
Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police. 
He was an ex-beadle of seventy-five, who was constantly mumbling
his prayers.

One evening, as Jean Valjean was passing by, when he had not Cosette
with him, he saw the beggar in his usual place, beneath the lantern
which had just been lighted.  The man seemed engaged in prayer,
according to his custom, and was much bent over.  Jean Valjean
stepped up to him and placed his customary alms in his hand. 
The mendicant raised his eyes suddenly, stared intently at
Jean Valjean, then dropped his head quickly.  This movement was
like a flash of lightning.  Jean Valjean was seized with a shudder. 
It seemed to him that he had just caught sight, by the light
of the street lantern, not of the placid and beaming visage
of the old beadle, but of a well-known and startling face. 
He experienced the same impression that one would have on finding
one's self, all of a sudden, face to face, in the dark, with a tiger. 
He recoiled, terrified, petrified, daring neither to breathe,
to speak, to remain, nor to flee, staring at the beggar who had
dropped his head, which was enveloped in a rag, and no longer appeared
to know that he was there.  At this strange moment, an instinct--
possibly the mysterious instinct of self-preservation,--restrained
Jean Valjean from uttering a word.  The beggar had the same figure,
the same rags, the same appearance as he had every day.  "Bah!" said
Jean Valjean, "I am mad!  I am dreaming!  Impossible!"  And he
returned profoundly troubled.

He hardly dared to confess, even to himself, that the face which he
thought he had seen was the face of Javert.

That night, on thinking the matter over, he regretted not having
questioned the man, in order to force him to raise his head
a second time.

On the following day, at nightfall, he went back.  The beggar was at
his post.  "Good day, my good man," said Jean Valjean, resolutely,
handing him a sou.  The beggar raised his head, and replied in
a whining voice, "Thanks, my good sir."  It was unmistakably the ex-beadle.

Jean Valjean felt completely reassured.  He began to laugh. 
"How the deuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there?"
he thought.  "Am I going to lose my eyesight now?"  And he thought
no more about it.

A few days afterwards,--it might have been at eight o'clock in
the evening,--he was in his room, and engaged in making Cosette
spell aloud, when he heard the house door open and then shut again. 
This struck him as singular.  The old woman, who was the only inhabitant
of the house except himself, always went to bed at nightfall,
so that she might not burn out her candles.  Jean Valjean made a sign
to Cosette to be quiet.  He heard some one ascending the stairs. 
It might possibly be the old woman, who might have fallen ill
and have been out to the apothecary's. Jean Valjean listened.

The step was heavy, and sounded like that of a man; but the old woman
wore stout shoes, and there is nothing which so strongly resembles
the step of a man as that of an old woman.  Nevertheless, Jean Valjean
blew out his candle.

He had sent Cosette to bed, saying to her in a low voice, "Get into
bed very softly"; and as he kissed her brow, the steps paused.

Jean Valjean remained silent, motionless, with his back towards
the door, seated on the chair from which he had not stirred,
and holding his breath in the dark.

After the expiration of a rather long interval, he turned round,
as he heard nothing more, and, as he raised his eyes towards the door
of his chamber, he saw a light through the keyhole.  This light formed
a sort of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall. 
There was evidently some one there, who was holding a candle in his
hand and listening.

Several minutes elapsed thus, and the light retreated.  But he heard
no sound of footsteps, which seemed to indicate that the person
who had been listening at the door had removed his shoes.

Jean Valjean threw himself, all dressed as he was, on his bed,
and could not close his eyes all night.

At daybreak, just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue,
he was awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some
attic at the end of the corridor, then he heard the same masculine
footstep which had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening. 
The step was approaching.  He sprang off the bed and applied his eye
to the keyhole, which was tolerably large, hoping to see the person
who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at
his door, as he passed.  It was a man, in fact, who passed, this time
without pausing, in front of Jean Valjean's chamber.  The corridor
was too dark to allow of the person's face being distinguished;
but when the man reached the staircase, a ray of light from without
made it stand out like a silhouette, and Jean Valjean had a complete
view of his back.  The man was of lofty stature, clad in a long
frock-coat, with a cudgel under his arm.  The formidable neck and
shoulders belonged to Javert.

Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him
through his window opening on the boulevard, but he would have been
obliged to open the window:  he dared not.

It was evident that this man had entered with a key, and like himself. 
Who had given him that key?  What was the meaning of this?

When the old woman came to do the work, at seven o'clock
in the morning, Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her,
but he did not question her.  The good woman appeared as usual.

As she swept up she remarked to him:--

"Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night?"

At that age, and on that boulevard, eight o'clock in the evening
was the dead of the night.

"That is true, by the way," he replied, in the most natural
tone possible.  "Who was it?"

"It was a new lodger who has come into the house," said the old woman.

"And what is his name?"

"I don't know exactly; Dumont, or Daumont, or some name of that sort."

"And who is this Monsieur Dumont?"

The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes, and answered:--

"A gentleman of property, like yourself."

Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning.  Jean Valjean thought he
perceived one.

When the old woman had taken her departure, he did up a hundred francs
which he had in a cupboard, into a roll, and put it in his pocket. 
In spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation
so that he might not be heard rattling silver, a hundred-sou piece
escaped from his hands and rolled noisily on the floor.

When darkness came on, he descended and carefully scrutinized both
sides of the boulevard.  He saw no one.  The boulevard appeared
to be absolutely deserted.  It is true that a person can conceal
himself behind trees.

He went up stairs again.

"Come."  he said to Cosette.

He took her by the hand, and they both went out.


