

BOOK FIFTH.--FOR A BLACK HUNT, A MUTE PACK


CHAPTER I

THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY


An observation here becomes necessary, in view of the pages
which the reader is about to peruse, and of others which will
be met with further on.

The author of this book, who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself,
has been absent from Paris for many years.  Paris has been transformed
since he quitted it.  A new city has arisen, which is, after a fashion,
unknown to him.  There is no need for him to say that he loves Paris: 
Paris is his mind's natal city.  In consequence of demolitions
and reconstructions, the Paris of his youth, that Paris which he bore
away religiously in his memory, is now a Paris of days gone by. 
He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed. 
It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot
and says, "In such a street there stands such and such a house,"
neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality. 
Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble. 
For his own part, he is unacquainted with the new Paris, and he
writes with the old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is
precious to him.  It is a delight to him to dream that there still
lingers behind him something of that which he beheld when he was
in his own country, and that all has not vanished.  So long as you
go and come in your native land, you imagine that those streets are
a matter of indifference to you; that those windows, those roofs,
and those doors are nothing to you; that those walls are strangers
to you; that those trees are merely the first encountered haphazard;
that those houses, which you do not enter, are useless to you;
that the pavements which you tread are merely stones.  Later on,
when you are no longer there, you perceive that the streets are dear
to you; that you miss those roofs, those doors; and that those
walls are necessary to you, those trees are well beloved by you;
that you entered those houses which you never entered, every day,
and that you have left a part of your heart, of your blood,
of your soul, in those pavements.  All those places which you
no longer behold, which you may never behold again, perchance,
and whose memory you have cherished, take on a melancholy charm,
recur to your mind with the melancholy of an apparition, make the holy
land visible to you, and are, so to speak, the very form of France,
and you love them; and you call them up as they are, as they were,
and you persist in this, and you will submit to no change: 
for you are attached to the figure of your fatherland as to the face
of your mother.

May we, then, be permitted to speak of the past in the present? 
That said, we beg the reader to take note of it, and we continue.

Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into
the streets, taking the most intricate lines which he could devise,
returning on his track at times, to make sure that he was not
being followed.

This manoeuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag.  On soil where
an imprint of the track may be left, this manoeuvre possesses,
among other advantages, that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs,
by throwing them on the wrong scent.  In venery this is called
false re-imbushment.

The moon was full that night.  Jean Valjean was not sorry for this. 
The moon, still very close to the horizon, cast great masses of light
and shadow in the streets.  Jean Valjean could glide along close
to the houses on the dark side, and yet keep watch on the light side. 
He did not, perhaps, take sufficiently into consideration the fact
that the dark side escaped him.  Still, in the deserted lanes which
lie near the Rue Poliveau, he thought he felt certain that no one
was following him.

Cosette walked on without asking any questions.  The sufferings
of the first six years of her life had instilled something passive
into her nature.  Moreover,--and this is a remark to which we
shall frequently have occasion to recur,--she had grown used,
without being herself aware of it, to the peculiarities of this
good man and to the freaks of destiny.  And then she was with him,
and she felt safe.

Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette. 
He trusted in God, as she trusted in him.  It seemed as though he
also were clinging to the hand of some one greater than himself;
he thought he felt a being leading him, though invisible. 
However, he had no settled idea, no plan, no project.  He was not
even absolutely sure that it was Javert, and then it might have
been Javert, without Javert knowing that he was Jean Valjean.  Was not
he disguised?  Was not he believed to be dead?  Still, queer things
had been going on for several days.  He wanted no more of them. 
He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house.  Like the wild
animal chased from its lair, he was seeking a hole in which he
might hide until he could find one where he might dwell.

Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard
quarter, which was already asleep, as though the discipline
of the Middle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed;
he combined in various manners, with cunning strategy, the Rue
Censier and the Rue Copeau, the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the
Rue du Puits l'Ermite. There are lodging houses in this locality,
but he did not even enter one, finding nothing which suited him. 
He had no doubt that if any one had chanced to be upon his track,
they would have lost it.

As eleven o'clock struck from Saint-Etienne-du-Mont, he was
traversing the Rue de Pontoise, in front of the office of the
commissary of police, situated at No. 14.  A few moments later,
the instinct of which we have spoken above made him turn round. 
At that moment he saw distinctly, thanks to the commissary's lantern,
which betrayed them, three men who were following him closely, pass,
one after the other, under that lantern, on the dark side of the street. 
One of the three entered the alley leading to the commissary's house. 
The one who marched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious.

"Come, child," he said to Cosette; and he made haste to quit
the Rue Pontoise.

He took a circuit, turned into the Passage des Patriarches,
which was closed on account of the hour, strode along the Rue de
l'Epee-de-Bois and the Rue de l'Arbalete, and plunged into the Rue
des Postes.

At that time there was a square formed by the intersection
of streets, where the College Rollin stands to-day,
and where the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve turns off.

It is understood, of course, that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve
is an old street, and that a posting-chaise does not pass through
the Rue des Postes once in ten years.  In the thirteenth century
this Rue des Postes was inhabited by potters, and its real name
is Rue des Pots.

The moon cast a livid light into this open space.  Jean Valjean
went into ambush in a doorway, calculating that if the men were
still following him, he could not fail to get a good look at them,
as they traversed this illuminated space.

In point of fact, three minutes had not elapsed when the men made
their appearance.  There were four of them now.  All were tall,
dressed in long, brown coats, with round hats, and huge cudgels in
their hands.  Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them
no less alarming than did their sinister stride through the darkness. 
One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois.

They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group, like men
in consultation.  They had an air of indecision.  The one who appeared
to be their leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right
hand in the direction which Jean Valjean had taken; another seemed
to indicate the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy. 
At the moment when the first man wheeled round, the moon fell full
in his face.  Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly.



CHAPTER II


IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D'AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES


Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean:  fortunately it still
lasted for the men.  He took advantage of their hesitation. 
It was time lost for them, but gained for him.  He slipped from
under the gate where he had concealed himself, and went down the Rue
des Postes, towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes.  Cosette was
beginning to be tired.  He took her in his arms and carried her. 
There were no passers-by, and the street lanterns had not been
lighted on account of there being a moon.

He redoubled his pace.

In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries, on the front of
which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription:--

               De Goblet fils c'est ici la fabrique;[14]
               Venez choisir des cruches et des broos,
               Des pots a fleurs, des tuyaux, de la brique.
               A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux.

     [14]  This is the factory of Goblet Junior:
          Come choose your jugs and crocks,
          Flower-pots, pipes, bricks.
          The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer.



He left behind him the Rue de la Clef, then the Fountain Saint-Victor,
skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets, and reached
the quay.  There he turned round.  The quay was deserted.  The streets
were deserted.  There was no one behind him.  He drew a long breath.

He gained the Pont d'Austerlitz.

Tolls were still collected there at that epoch.

He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou.

"It is two sous," said the old soldier in charge of the bridge. 
"You are carrying a child who can walk.  Pay for two."

He paid, vexed that his passage should have aroused remark. 
Every flight should be an imperceptible slipping away.

A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself,
and on its way, like him, to the right bank.  This was of use to him. 
He could traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart.

Towards the middle of the Bridge, Cosette, whose feet were benumbed,
wanted to walk.  He set her on the ground and took her hand again.

The bridge once crossed, he perceived some timber-yards on his right. 
He directed his course thither.  In order to reach them,
it was necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered
and illuminated space.  He did not hesitate.  Those who were on
his track had evidently lost the scent, and Jean Valjean believed
himself to be out of danger.  Hunted, yes; followed, no.

A little street, the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, opened out
between two timber-yards enclosed in walls.  This street was dark
and narrow and seemed made expressly for him.  Before entering
it he cast a glance behind him,

From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent
of the Pont d'Austerlitz.

Four shadows were just entering on the bridge.

These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes
and were on their way to the right bank.

These four shadows were the four men.

Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured.

One hope remained to him; it was, that the men had not, perhaps,
stepped on the bridge, and had not caught sight of him while he
was crossing the large illuminated space, holding Cosette by the hand.

In that case, by plunging into the little street before him,
he might escape, if he could reach the timber-yards, the marshes,
the market-gardens, the uninhabited ground which was not built upon.

It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent
little street.  He entered it.



CHAPTER III

TO WIT, THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727


Three hundred paces further on, he arrived at a point where
the street forked.  It separated into two streets, which ran
in a slanting line, one to the right, and the other to the left.

Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches
of a Y. Which should he choose?  He did not hesitate, but took
the one on the right.

Why?

Because that to the left ran towards a suburb, that is to say,
towards inhabited regions, and the right branch towards the open country,
that is to say, towards deserted regions.

However, they no longer walked very fast.  Cosette's pace retarded
Jean Valjean's.

He took her up and carried her again.  Cosette laid her head
on the shoulder of the good man and said not a word.

He turned round from time to time and looked behind him. 
He took care to keep always on the dark side of the street. 
The street was straight in his rear.  The first two or three times
that he turned round he saw nothing; the silence was profound,
and he continued his march somewhat reassured.  All at once,
on turning round, he thought he perceived in the portion of the
street which he had just passed through, far off in the obscurity,
something which was moving.

He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked, hoping to find
some side-street, to make his escape through it, and thus to break
his scent once more.

He arrived at a wall.

This wall, however, did not absolutely prevent further progress;
it was a wall which bordered a transverse street, in which the one he
had taken ended.

Here again, he was obliged to come to a decision; should he go
to the right or to the left.

He glanced to the right.  The fragmentary lane was prolonged
between buildings which were either sheds or barns, then ended at a
blind alley.  The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible,--
a lofty white wall.

He glanced to the left.  On that side the lane was open,
and about two hundred paces further on, ran into a street
of which it was the affluent.  On that side lay safety.

At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left,
in an effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane,
he perceived a sort of motionless, black statue at the corner of the
lane and the street towards which he was on the point of directing
his steps.

It was some one, a man, who had evidently just been posted there,
and who was barring the passage and waiting.

Jean Valjean recoiled.

The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself, situated
between the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Rapee, is one of those
which recent improvements have transformed from top to bottom,--
resulting in disfigurement according to some, and in a transfiguration
according to others.  The market-gardens, the timber-yards, and
the old buildings have been effaced.  To-day, there are brand-new,
wide streets, arenas, circuses, hippodromes, railway stations, and
a prison, Mazas, there; progress, as the reader sees, with its antidote.

Half a century ago, in that ordinary, popular tongue, which is all
compounded of traditions, which persists in calling the Institut
les Quatre-Nations, and the Opera-Comique Feydeau, the precise
spot whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called le Petit Picpus. 
The Porte Saint-Jacques, the Porte Paris, the Barriere des Sergents,
the Porcherons, la Galiote, les Celestins, les Capucins, le Mail,
la Bourbe, l'Arbre de Cracovie, la Petite-Pologne--these are the names
of old Paris which survive amid the new.  The memory of the populace
hovers over these relics of the past.

Le Petit-Picpus, which, moreover, hardly ever had any existence,
and never was more than the outline of a quarter, had nearly the
monkish aspect of a Spanish town.  The roads were not much paved;
the streets were not much built up.  With the exception of the two
or three streets, of which we shall presently speak, all was wall
and solitude there.  Not a shop, not a vehicle, hardly a candle
lighted here and there in the windows; all lights extinguished
after ten o'clock. Gardens, convents, timber-yards, marshes;
occasional lowly dwellings and great walls as high as the houses.

Such was this quarter in the last century.  The Revolution snubbed
it soundly.  The republican government demolished and cut through it. 
Rubbish shoots were established there.  Thirty years ago, this quarter
was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings. 
To-day, it has been utterly blotted out.  The Petit-Picpus,
of which no existing plan has preserved a trace, is indicated
with sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727, published at Paris
by Denis Thierry, Rue Saint-Jacques, opposite the Rue du Platre;
and at Lyons, by Jean Girin, Rue Merciere, at the sign of Prudence. 
Petit-Picpus had, as we have just mentioned, a Y of streets,
formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, which spread
out in two branches, taking on the left the name of Little
Picpus Street, and on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau. 
The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as by a bar;
this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur. The Rue Polonceau ended there;
Rue Petit-Picpus passed on, and ascended towards the Lenoir market. 
A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the
Rue Polonceau, and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur, turning
abruptly at a right angle, in front of him the wall of that street,
and on his right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur, which
had no issue and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot.

It was here that Jean Valjean stood.

As we have just said, on catching sight of that black silhouette
standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue
Petit-Picpus, he recoiled.  There could be no doubt of it. 
That phantom was lying in wait for him.

What was he to do?

The time for retreating was passed.  That which he had perceived
in movement an instant before, in the distant darkness, was Javert
and his squad without a doubt.  Javert was probably already at
the commencement of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood. 
Javert, to all appearances, was acquainted with this little labyrinth,
and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men to guard
the exit.  These surmises, which so closely resembled proofs,
whirled suddenly, like a handful of dust caught up by an
unexpected gust of wind, through Jean Valjean's mournful brain. 
He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot; there he was cut off. 
He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus; there stood a sentinel.  He saw
that black form standing out in relief against the white pavement,
illuminated by the moon; to advance was to fall into this man's hands;
to retreat was to fling himself into Javert's arms.  Jean Valjean
felt himself caught, as in a net, which was slowly contracting;
he gazed heavenward in despair.



CHAPTER IV

THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT


In order to understand what follows, it is requisite to form an
exact idea of the Droit-Mur lane, and, in particular, of the angle
which one leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau
into this lane.  Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on
the right, as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus, by houses of mean aspect;
on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines, composed of
numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as
they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side; so that this building,
which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side, was tolerably low
on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau.  There, at the angle of
which we have spoken, it descended to such a degree that it consisted
of merely a wall.  This wall did not abut directly on the Street;
it formed a deeply retreating niche, concealed by its two corners
from two observers who might have been, one in the Rue Polonceau,
the other in the Rue Droit-Mur.

Beginning with these angles of the niche, the wall extended along
the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49,
and along the Rue Droit-Mur, where the fragment was much shorter,
as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable
it intersected, thus forming another retreating angle in the street. 
This gable was sombre of aspect; only one window was visible, or,
to speak more correctly, two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc
and kept constantly closed.

The state of the places of which we are here giving a description
is rigorously exact, and will certainly awaken a very precise
memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter.

The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a
colossal and wretched door; it was a vast, formless assemblage
of perpendicular planks, the upper ones being broader than
the lower, bound together by long transverse strips of iron. 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions,
and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously.

A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche, and the wall was
covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau.

In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself,
this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look
which tempted him.  He ran his eyes rapidly over it; he said to himself,
that if he could contrive to get inside it, he might save himself. 
First he conceived an idea, then a hope.

In the central portion of the front of this building, on the Rue
Droit-Mur side, there were at all the windows of the different
stories ancient cistern pipes of lead.  The various branches of the
pipes which led from one central pipe to all these little basins
sketched out a sort of tree on the front.  These ramifications
of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless
vine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses.

This odd espalier, with its branches of lead and iron, was the
first thing that struck Jean Valjean.  He seated Cosette with
her back against a stone post, with an injunction to be silent,
and ran to the spot where the conduit touched the pavement. 
Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the house. 
But the pipe was dilapidated and past service, and hardly hung to
its fastenings.  Moreover, all the windows of this silent dwelling
were grated with heavy iron bars, even the attic windows in the roof. 
And then, the moon fell full upon that facade, and the man who was
watching at the corner of the street would have seen Jean Valjean in
the act of climbing.  And finally, what was to be done with Cosette? 
How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story house?

He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe,
and crawled along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau.

When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette,
he noticed that no one could see him there.  As we have just explained,
he was concealed from all eyes, no matter from which direction
they were approaching; besides this, he was in the shadow. 
Finally, there were two doors; perhaps they might be forced. 
The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy evidently
abutted on a garden where he could, at least, hide himself,
although there were as yet no leaves on the trees, and spend
the remainder of the night.

Time was passing; he must act quickly.

He felt over the carriage door, and immediately recognized the fact
that it was impracticable outside and in.

He approached the other door with more hope; it was frightfully decrepit;
its very immensity rendered it less solid; the planks were rotten;
the iron bands--there were only three of them--were rusted.  It seemed
as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier.

On examining it he found that the door was not a door; it had
neither hinges, cross-bars, lock, nor fissure in the middle;
the iron bands traversed it from side to side without any break. 
Through the crevices in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs
and blocks of stone roughly cemented together, which passers-by
might still have seen there ten years ago.  He was forced to
acknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply
the wooden decoration of a building against which it was placed. 
It was easy to tear off a plank; but then, one found one's self face
to face with a wall.



CHAPTER V

WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS


At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible
at some distance.  Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner
of the street.  Seven or eight soldiers, drawn up in a platoon,
had just debouched into the Rue Polonceau.  He saw the gleam of
their bayonets.  They were advancing towards him; these soldiers,
at whose head he distinguished Javert's tall figure, advanced slowly
and cautiously.  They halted frequently; it was plain that they
were searching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures
of the doors and alleys.

This was some patrol that Javert had encountered--there could
be no mistake as to this surmise--and whose aid he had demanded.

Javert's two acolytes were marching in their ranks.

At the rate at which they were marching, and in consideration
of the halts which they were making, it would take them about
a quarter of an hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood. 
It was a frightful moment.  A few minutes only separated Jean
Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for
the third time.  And the galleys now meant not only the galleys,
but Cosette lost to him forever; that is to say, a life resembling
the interior of a tomb.

There was but one thing which was possible.

Jean Valjean had this peculiarity, that he carried, as one might say,
two beggar's pouches:  in one he kept his saintly thoughts;
in the other the redoubtable talents of a convict.  He rummaged
in the one or the other, according to circumstances.

Among his other resources, thanks to his numerous escapes
from the prison at Toulon, he was, as it will be remembered,
a past master in the incredible art of crawling up without
ladder or climbing-irons, by sheer muscular force, by leaning
on the nape of his neck, his shoulders, his hips, and his knees,
by helping himself on the rare projections of the stone, in the
right angle of a wall, as high as the sixth story, if need be;
an art which has rendered so celebrated and so alarming that corner
of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which Battemolle,
condemned to death, made his escape twenty years ago.

Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied
the linden; it was about eighteen feet in height.  The angle
which it formed with the gable of the large building was filled,
at its lower extremity, by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape,
probably intended to preserve that too convenient corner from
the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by. This
practice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris.

This mass was about five feet in height; the space above the summit
of this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than
fourteen feet.

The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping.

Cosette was the difficulty, for she did not know how to climb a wall. 
Should he abandon her?  Jean Valjean did not once think of that. 
It was impossible to carry her.  A man's whole strength is required
to successfully carry out these singular ascents.  The least burden
would disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards.

A rope would have been required; Jean Valjean had none.  Where was he to
get a rope at midnight, in the Rue Polonceau?  Certainly, if Jean Valjean
had had a kingdom, he would have given it for a rope at that moment.

All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which
sometimes dazzle, sometimes illuminate us.

Jean Valjean's despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post
of the blind alley Genrot.

At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris. 
At nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted;
they were ascended and descended by means of a rope, which traversed
the street from side to side, and was adjusted in a groove of the post. 
The pulley over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern
in a little iron box, the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter,
and the rope itself was protected by a metal case.

Jean Valjean, with the energy of a supreme struggle, crossed the
street at one bound, entered the blind alley, broke the latch of
the little box with the point of his knife, and an instant later he
was beside Cosette once more.  He had a rope.  These gloomy inventors
of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting against fatality.

We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted
that night.  The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus
naturally extinct, like the rest; and one could pass directly
under it without even noticing that it was no longer in its place.

Nevertheless, the hour, the place, the darkness, Jean Valjean's
absorption, his singular gestures, his goings and comings, all had
begun to render Cosette uneasy.  Any other child than she would
have given vent to loud shrieks long before.  She contented herself
with plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat.  They could
hear the sound of the patrol's approach ever more and more distinctly.

"Father," said she, in a very low voice, "I am afraid.  Who is
coming yonder?"

"Hush!" replied the unhappy man; "it is Madame Thenardier."

Cosette shuddered.  He added:--

"Say nothing.  Don't interfere with me.  If you cry out, if you weep,
the Thenardier is lying in wait for you.  She is coming to take
you back."

Then, without haste, but without making a useless movement,
with firm and curt precision, the more remarkable at a moment
when the patrol and Javert might come upon him at any moment,
he undid his cravat, passed it round Cosette's body under the armpits,
taking care that it should not hurt the child, fastened this cravat
to one end of the rope, by means of that knot which seafaring men
call a "swallow knot," took the other end of the rope in his teeth,
pulled off his shoes and stockings, which he threw over the wall,
stepped upon the mass of masonry, and began to raise himself in the
angle of the wall and the gable with as much solidity and certainty
as though he had the rounds of a ladder under his feet and elbows. 
Half a minute had not elapsed when he was resting on his knees on
the wall.

Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement, without uttering a word. 
Jean Valjean's injunction, and the name of Madame Thenardier,
had chilled her blood.

All at once she heard Jean Valjean's voice crying to her,
though in a very low tone:--

"Put your back against the wall."

She obeyed.

"Don't say a word, and don't be alarmed," went on Jean Valjean.

And she felt herself lifted from the ground.

Before she had time to recover herself, she was on the top of the wall.

Jean Valjean grasped her, put her on his back, took her two tiny hands
in his large left hand, lay down flat on his stomach and crawled
along on top of the wall as far as the cant.  As he had guessed,
there stood a building whose roof started from the top of the wooden
barricade and descended to within a very short distance of the ground,
with a gentle slope which grazed the linden-tree. A lucky circumstance,
for the wall was much higher on this side than on the street side. 
Jean Valjean could only see the ground at a great depth below him.

He had just reached the slope of the roof, and had not yet left
the crest of the wall, when a violent uproar announced the arrival
of the patrol.  The thundering voice of Javert was audible:--

"Search the blind alley!  The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded! so is the Rue
Petit-Picpus. I'll answer for it that he is in the blind alley."

The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley.

Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof, still holding
fast to Cosette, reached the linden-tree, and leaped to the ground. 
Whether from terror or courage, Cosette had not breathed a sound,
though her hands were a little abraded.



CHAPTER VI

THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA


Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast
and of singular aspect; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made
to be looked at in winter and at night.  This garden was oblong in shape,
with an alley of large poplars at the further end, tolerably tall
forest trees in the corners, and an unshaded space in the centre,
where could be seen a very large, solitary tree, then several fruit-trees,
gnarled and bristling like bushes, beds of vegetables, a melon patch,
whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight, and an old well. 
Here and there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss. 
The alleys were bordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs. 
The grass had half taken possession of them, and a green mould
covered the rest.

Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him
as a means of descent, a pile of fagots, and, behind the fagots,
directly against the wall, a stone statue, whose mutilated face was
no longer anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely
through the gloom.

The building was a sort of ruin, where dismantled chambers were
distinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as a shed.

The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had a wing on the Rue
Petit-Picpus, turned two facades, at right angles, towards this garden. 
These interior facades were even more tragic than the exterior. 
All the windows were grated.  Not a gleam of light was visible
at any one of them.  The upper story had scuttles like prisons. 
One of those facades cast its shadow on the other, which fell over the
garden like an immense black pall.

No other house was visible.  The bottom of the garden was lost in mist
and darkness.  Nevertheless, walls could be confusedly made out,
which intersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond,
and the low roofs of the Rue Polonceau.

Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined. 
There was no one in it, which was quite natural in view of the hour;
but it did not seem as though this spot were made for any one to walk in,
even in broad daylight.

Jean Valjean's first care had been to get hold of his shoes
and put them on again, then to step under the shed with Cosette. 
A man who is fleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden. 
The child, whose thoughts were still on the Thenardier, shared his
instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as possible.

Cosette trembled and pressed close to him.  They heard the tumultuous
noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets;
the blows of their gun-stocks against the stones; Javert's appeals
to the police spies whom he had posted, and his imprecations mingled
with words which could not be distinguished.

At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that
species of stormy roar were becoming more distant.  Jean Valjean
held his breath.

He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette's mouth.

However, the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm,
that this frightful uproar, close and furious as it was,
did not disturb him by so much as the shadow of a misgiving. 
It seemed as though those walls had been built of the deaf stones
of which the Scriptures speak.

All at once, in the midst of this profound calm, a fresh sound arose;
a sound as celestial, divine, ineffable, ravishing, as the other had
been horrible.  It was a hymn which issued from the gloom, a dazzling
burst of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of
the night; women's voices, but voices composed at one and the same time
of the pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children,--
voices which are not of the earth, and which resemble those that the
newborn infant still hears, and which the dying man hears already. 
This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above
the garden.  At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated, one
would have said that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom.

Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees.

They knew not what it was, they knew not where they were; but both
of them, the man and the child, the penitent and the innocent,
felt that they must kneel.

These voices had this strange characteristic, that they
did not prevent the building from seeming to be deserted. 
It was a supernatural chant in an uninhabited house.

While these voices were singing, Jean Valjean thought of nothing. 
He no longer beheld the night; he beheld a blue sky.  It seemed to him
that he felt those wings which we all have within us, unfolding.

The song died away.  It may have lasted a long time.  Jean Valjean
could not have told.  Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment.

All fell silent again.  There was no longer anything in the street;
there was nothing in the garden.  That which had menaced,
that which had reassured him,--all had vanished.  The breeze
swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the wall, and they gave
out a faint, sweet, melancholy sound.



CHAPTER VII

CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA


The night wind had risen, which indicated that it must be between
one and two o'clock in the morning.  Poor Cosette said nothing. 
As she had seated herself beside him and leaned her head against him,
Jean Valjean had fancied that she was asleep.  He bent down and
looked at her.  Cosette's eyes were wide open, and her thoughtful
air pained Jean Valjean.

She was still trembling.

"Are you sleepy?" said Jean Valjean.

"I am very cold," she replied.

A moment later she resumed:--

"Is she still there?"

"Who?" said Jean Valjean.

"Madame Thenardier."

Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed
to make Cosette keep silent.

"Ah!" said he, "she is gone.  You need fear nothing further."

The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast.

The ground was damp, the shed open on all sides, the breeze grew
more keen every instant.  The goodman took off his coat and wrapped
it round Cosette.

"Are you less cold now?" said he.

"Oh, yes, father."

"Well, wait for me a moment.  I will soon be back."

He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building, seeking a
better shelter.  He came across doors, but they were closed. 
There were bars at all the windows of the ground floor.

Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice, he observed
that he was coming to some arched windows, where he perceived a light. 
He stood on tiptoe and peeped through one of these windows. 
They all opened on a tolerably vast hall, paved with large flagstones,
cut up by arcades and pillars, where only a tiny light and great
shadows were visible.  The light came from a taper which was
burning in one corner.  The apartment was deserted, and nothing
was stirring in it.  Nevertheless, by dint of gazing intently he
thought he perceived on the ground something which appeared to be
covered with a winding-sheet, and which resembled a human form. 
This form was lying face downward, flat on the pavement, with the
arms extended in the form of a cross, in the immobility of death. 
One would have said, judging from a sort of serpent which undulated
over the floor, that this sinister form had a rope round its neck.

The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are
sparely illuminated, which adds to horror.

Jean Valjean often said afterwards, that, although many funereal
spectres had crossed his path in life, he had never beheld anything more
blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical form accomplishing
some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place, and beheld thus
at night.  It was alarming to suppose that that thing was perhaps dead;
and still more alarming to think that it was perhaps alive.

He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass, and to watch whether
the thing would move.  In spite of his remaining thus what seemed
to him a very long time, the outstretched form made no movement. 
All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror,
and he fled.  He began to run towards the shed, not daring to
look behind him.  It seemed to him, that if he turned his head,
he should see that form following him with great strides and waving
its arms.

He reached the ruin all out of breath.  His knees were giving way
beneath him; the perspiration was pouring from him.

Where was he?  Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort
of sepulchre in the midst of Paris!  What was this strange house? 
An edifice full of nocturnal mystery, calling to souls through the
darkness with the voice of angels, and when they came, offering them
abruptly that terrible vision; promising to open the radiant portals
of heaven, and then opening the horrible gates of the tomb!  And it
actually was an edifice, a house, which bore a number on the street! 
It was not a dream!  He had to touch the stones to convince himself
that such was the fact.

Cold, anxiety, uneasiness, the emotions of the night, had given
him a genuine fever, and all these ideas were clashing together
in his brain.

He stepped up to Cosette.  She was asleep.



CHAPTER VIII

THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS


The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep.

He sat down beside her and began to think.  Little by little,
as he gazed at her, he grew calm and regained possession of his
freedom of mind.

He clearly perceived this truth, the foundation of his life henceforth,
that so long as she was there, so long as he had her near him,
he should need nothing except for her, he should fear nothing
except for her.  He was not even conscious that he was very cold,
since he had taken off his coat to cover her.

Nevertheless, athwart this revery into which he had fallen he had
heard for some time a peculiar noise.  It was like the tinkling
of a bell.  This sound proceeded from the garden.  It could be heard
distinctly though faintly.  It resembled the faint, vague music
produced by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures.

This noise made Valjean turn round.

He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden.

A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the
melon beds, rising, stooping, halting, with regular movements,
as though he were dragging or spreading out something on the ground. 
This person appeared to limp.

Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy. 
For them everything is hostile and suspicious.  They distrust the day
because it enables people to see them, and the night because it
aids in surprising them.  A little while before he had shivered
because the garden was deserted, and now he shivered because there
was some one there.

He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors.  He said
to himself that Javert and the spies had, perhaps, not taken
their departure; that they had, no doubt, left people on the watch
in the street; that if this man should discover him in the garden,
he would cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up. 
He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind
a heap of old furniture, which was out of use, in the most remote
corner of the shed.  Cosette did not stir.

From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the
melon patch.  The strange thing about it was, that the sound of the
bell followed each of this man's movements.  When the man approached,
the sound approached; when the man retreated, the sound retreated;
if he made any hasty gesture, a tremolo accompanied the gesture;
when he halted, the sound ceased.  It appeared evident that the
bell was attached to that man; but what could that signify? 
Who was this man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or
an ox?

As he put these questions to himself, he touched Cosette's hands. 
They were icy cold.

"Ah! good God!" he cried.

He spoke to her in a low voice:--

"Cosette!"

She did not open her eyes.

He shook her vigorously.

She did not wake.

"Is she dead?" he said to himself, and sprang to his feet,
quivering from head to foot.

The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind. 
There are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort
of furies, and violently force the partitions of our brains. 
When those we love are in question, our prudence invents every sort
of madness.  He remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night
may be fatal.

Cosette was pale, and had fallen at full length on the ground
at his feet, without a movement.

He listened to her breathing:  she still breathed, but with a
respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction.


How was he to warm her back to life?  How was he to rouse her? 
All that was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts. 
He rushed wildly from the ruin.

It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside
a fire in less than a quarter of an hour.



CHAPTER IX

THE MAN WITH THE BELL


He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden. 
He had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket
of his waistcoat.

The man's head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. 
In a few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him.

Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry:--

"One hundred francs!"

The man gave a start and raised his eyes.

"You can earn a hundred francs," went on Jean Valjean, "if you
will grant me shelter for this night."

The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean's terrified countenance.

"What! so it is you, Father Madeleine!" said the man.

That name, thus pronounced, at that obscure hour, in that unknown spot,
by that strange man, made Jean Valjean start back.

He had expected anything but that.  The person who thus addressed
him was a bent and lame old man, dressed almost like a peasant,
who wore on his left knee a leather knee-cap, whence hung a moderately
large bell.  His face, which was in the shadow, was not distinguishable.

However, the goodman had removed his cap, and exclaimed,
trembling all over:--

"Ah, good God!  How come you here, Father Madeleine?  Where did
you enter?  Dieu-Jesus! Did you fall from heaven?  There is no
trouble about that:  if ever you do fall, it will be from there. 
And what a state you are in!  You have no cravat; you have no hat;
you have no coat!  Do you know, you would have frightened any one
who did not know you?  No coat!  Lord God!  Are the saints going
mad nowadays?  But how did you get in here?"

His words tumbled over each other.  The goodman talked with a
rustic volubility, in which there was nothing alarming.  All this
was uttered with a mixture of stupefaction and naive kindliness.

"Who are you? and what house is this?" demanded Jean Valjean.

"Ah! pardieu, this is too much!" exclaimed the old man. 
"I am the person for whom you got the place here, and this house
is the one where you had me placed.  What!  You don't recognize me?"

"No," said Jean Valjean; "and how happens it that you know me?"

"You saved my life," said the man.

He turned.  A ray of moonlight outlined his profile, and Jean
Valjean recognized old Fauchelevent.

"Ah!" said Jean Valjean, "so it is you?  Yes, I recollect you."

"That is very lucky," said the old man, in a reproachful tone.

"And what are you doing here?" resumed Jean Valjean.

"Why, I am covering my melons, of course!"

In fact, at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him, old Fauchelevent
held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in
spreading over the melon bed.  During the hour or thereabouts that he
had been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them. 
It was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar
movements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean.

He continued:--

"I said to myself, `The moon is bright:  it is going to freeze. 
What if I were to put my melons into their greatcoats?'  And," he added,
looking at Jean Valjean with a broad smile,--"pardieu! you ought
to have done the same!  But how do you come here?"

Jean Valjean, finding himself known to this man, at least only under
the name of Madeleine, thenceforth advanced only with caution. 
He multiplied his questions.  Strange to say, their roles seemed
to be reversed.  It was he, the intruder, who interrogated.

"And what is this bell which you wear on your knee?"

"This," replied Fauchelevent, "is so that I may be avoided."

"What! so that you may be avoided?"

Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air.

"Ah, goodness! there are only women in this house--many young girls. 
It appears that I should be a dangerous person to meet.  The bell
gives them warning.  When I come, they go.

"What house is this?"

"Come, you know well enough."

"But I do not."

"Not when you got me the place here as gardener?"

"Answer me as though I knew nothing."

"Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent."

Memories recurred to Jean Valjean.  Chance, that is to say, Providence,
had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine
where old Fauchelevent, crippled by the fall from his cart,
had been admitted on his recommendation two years previously. 
He repeated, as though talking to himself:--

"The Petit-Picpus convent."

"Exactly," returned old Fauchelevent.  "But to come to the point,
how the deuce did you manage to get in here, you, Father Madeleine? 
No matter if you are a saint; you are a man as well, and no man
enters here."

"You certainly are here."

"There is no one but me."

"Still," said Jean Valjean, "I must stay here."

"Ah, good God!" cried Fauchelevent.

Jean Valjean drew near to the old man, and said to him in a grave voice:--

"Father Fauchelevent, I saved your life."

"I was the first to recall it," returned Fauchelevent.

"Well, you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the
olden days."

Fauchelevent took in his aged, trembling, and wrinkled hands Jean
Valjean's two robust hands, and stood for several minutes as though
incapable of speaking.  At length he exclaimed:--

"Oh! that would be a blessing from the good God, if I could make you
some little return for that!  Save your life!  Monsieur le Maire,
dispose of the old man!"

A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man.  His countenance
seemed to emit a ray of light.

"What do you wish me to do?" he resumed.

"That I will explain to you.  You have a chamber?"

"I have an isolated hovel yonder, behind the ruins of the old convent,
in a corner which no one ever looks into.  There are three rooms
in it."

The hut was, in fact, so well hidden behind the ruins, and so
cleverly arranged to prevent it being seen, that Jean Valjean
had not perceived it.

"Good," said Jean Valjean.  "Now I am going to ask two things
of you."

"What are they, Mr. Mayor?"

"In the first place, you are not to tell any one what you know about me. 
In the second, you are not to try to find out anything more."

"As you please.  I know that you can do nothing that is not honest,
that you have always been a man after the good God's heart. 
And then, moreover, you it was who placed me here.  That concerns you. 
I am at your service."

"That is settled then.  Now, come with me.  We will go and get
the child."

"Ah!" said Fauchelevent, "so there is a child?"

He added not a word further, and followed Jean Valjean as a dog
follows his master.

Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette, who had grown rosy
again before the flame of a good fire, was lying asleep in the old
gardener's bed.  Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat
once more; his hat, which he had flung over the wall, had been
found and picked up.  While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat,
Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap, which now hung on
a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall.  The two men
were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon
which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese, black bread, a bottle
of wine, and two glasses, and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean,
as he laid his hand on the latter's knee:  "Ah!  Father Madeleine! 
You did not recognize me immediately; you save people's lives,
and then you forget them!  That is bad!  But they remember you! 
You are an ingrate!"



CHAPTER X

WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT


The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side, so to speak,
had come about in the simplest possible manner.

When Jean Valjean, on the evening of the very day when Javert had
arrested him beside Fantine's death-bed, had escaped from the town
jail of M. sur M., the police had supposed that he had betaken
himself to Paris.  Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost,
and everything disappears in this belly of the world, as in the
belly of the sea.  No forest hides a man as does that crowd. 
Fugitives of every sort know this.  They go to Paris as to an abyss;
there are gulfs which save.  The police know it also, and it
is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere. 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to
Paris to throw light on their researches.  Javert had, in fact,
rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean. 
Javert's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked
by M. Chabouillet, secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles. 
M. Chabouillet, who had, moreover, already been Javert's patron,
had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris. 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and, though the word
may seem strange for such services, honorable manners.

He no longer thought of Jean Valjean,--the wolf of to-day causes these
dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday,--when,
in December, 1823, he read a newspaper, he who never read newspapers;
but Javert, a monarchical man, had a desire to know the particulars
of the triumphal entry of the "Prince Generalissimo" into Bayonne. 
Just as he was finishing the article, which interested him; a name,
the name of Jean Valjean, attracted his attention at the bottom of
a page.  The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead,
and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not
doubt it.  He confined himself to the remark, "That's a good entry." 
Then he threw aside the paper, and thought no more about it.

Some time afterwards, it chanced that a police report was transmitted
from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police
in Paris, concerning the abduction of a child, which had taken place,
under peculiar circumstances, as it was said, in the commune
of Montfermeil.  A little girl of seven or eight years of age,
the report said, who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper
of that neighborhood, had been stolen by a stranger; this child answered
to the name of Cosette, and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine,
who had died in the hospital, it was not known where or when.

This report came under Javert's eye and set him to thinking.

The name of Fantine was well known to him.  He remembered that Jean
Valjean had made him, Javert, burst into laughter, by asking him
for a respite of three days, for the purpose of going to fetch that
creature's child.  He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been
arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach
for Montfermeil.  Some signs had made him suspect at the time that
this was the second occasion of his entering that coach, and that he
had already, on the previous day, made an excursion to the neighborhood
of that village, for he had not been seen in the village itself. 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil? 
It could not even be surmised.  Javert understood it now. 
Fantine's daughter was there.  Jean Valjean was going there in
search of her.  And now this child had been stolen by a stranger! 
Who could that stranger be?  Could it be Jean Valjean?  But Jean
Valjean was dead.  Javert, without saying anything to anybody,
took the coach from the Pewter Platter, Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette,
and made a trip to Montfermeil.

He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there;
he found a great deal of obscurity.

For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage. 
The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village. 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story, which ended
in the abduction of a child.  Hence the police report.  But their first
vexation having passed off, Thenardier, with his wonderful instinct,
had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up
the prosecutor of the Crown, and that his complaints with regard
to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix
upon himself, and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand,
the glittering eye of justice.  The last thing that owls desire
is to have a candle brought to them.  And in the first place,
how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received? 
He turned squarely round, put a gag on his wife's mouth,
and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him. 
He understood nothing about it; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile
at having that dear little creature "taken from him" so hastily;
he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer,
out of tenderness; but her "grandfather" had come for her in the
most natural way in the world.  He added the "grandfather," which
produced a good effect.  This was the story that Javert hit upon
when he arrived at Montfermeil.  The grandfather caused Jean Valjean
to vanish.

Nevertheless, Javert dropped a few questions, like plummets,
into Thenardier's history.  "Who was that grandfather? and what was
his name?"  Thenardier replied with simplicity:  "He is a wealthy farmer. 
I saw his passport.  I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert."

Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name. 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris.

"Jean Valjean is certainly dead," said he, "and I am a ninny."

He had again begun to forget this history, when, in the course
of March, 1824, he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the
parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed "the mendicant
who gives alms."  This person, the story ran, was a man of means,
whose name no one knew exactly, and who lived alone with a little
girl of eight years, who knew nothing about herself, save that she
had come from Montfermeil.  Montfermeil! that name was always
coming up, and it made Javert prick up his ears.  An old beggar
police spy, an ex-beadle, to whom this person had given alms,
added a few more details.  This gentleman of property was very shy,--
never coming out except in the evening, speaking to no one, except,
occasionally to the poor, and never allowing any one to approach him. 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat, which was worth many millions,
being all wadded with bank-bills. This piqued Javert's curiosity
in a decided manner.  In order to get a close look at this fantastic
gentleman without alarming him, he borrowed the beadle's outfit
for a day, and the place where the old spy was in the habit
of crouching every evening, whining orisons through his nose,
and playing the spy under cover of prayer.

"The suspected individual" did indeed approach Javert thus disguised,
and bestow alms on him.  At that moment Javert raised his head,
and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was
equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized
Jean Valjean.

However, the darkness might have misled him; Jean Valjean's death
was official; Javert cherished very grave doubts; and when in doubt,
Javert, the man of scruples, never laid a finger on any one's collar.

He followed his man to the Gorbeau house, and got "the old woman"
to talking, which was no difficult matter.  The old woman confirmed
the fact regarding the coat lined with millions, and narrated
to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill.  She had seen it! 
She had handled it!  Javert hired a room; that evening he installed
himself in it.  He came and listened at the mysterious lodger's door,
hoping to catch the sound of his voice, but Jean Valjean saw his candle
through the key-hole, and foiled the spy by keeping silent.

On the following day Jean Valjean decamped; but the noise made by the fall
of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman, who, hearing the
rattling of coin, suspected that he might be intending to leave,
and made haste to warn Javert.  At night, when Jean Valjean came out,
Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men.

Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture, but he had not
mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize;
that was his secret, and he had kept it for three reasons: 
in the first place, because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean
Valjean on the alert; next, because, to lay hands on an ex-convict
who had made his escape and was reputed dead, on a criminal whom
justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most
dangerous sort, was a magnificent success which the old members
of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer
like Javert, and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict;
and lastly, because Javert, being an artist, had a taste for
the unforeseen.  He hated those well-heralded successes which are
talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off. 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil
them suddenly at the last.

Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree, then from
corner to corner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for
a single instant; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed
himself to be the most secure Javert's eye had been on him. 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean?  Because he was still
in doubt.

It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely
at its ease; the free press embarrassed it; several arbitrary arrests
denounced by the newspapers, had echoed even as far as the Chambers,
and had rendered the Prefecture timid.  Interference with individual
liberty was a grave matter.  The police agents were afraid of making
a mistake; the prefect laid the blame on them; a mistake meant dismissal. 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph,
reproduced by twenty newspapers, would have caused in Paris: 
"Yesterday, an aged grandfather, with white hair, a respectable
and well-to-do gentleman, who was walking with his grandchild,
aged eight, was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture
as an escaped convict!"

Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own;
injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of
the prefect.  He was really in doubt.

Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark.

Sadness, uneasiness, anxiety, depression, this fresh misfortune
of being forced to flee by night, to seek a chance refuge in Paris
for Cosette and himself, the necessity of regulating his pace
to the pace of the child--all this, without his being aware of it,
had altered Jean Valjean's walk, and impressed on his bearing
such senility, that the police themselves, incarnate in the person
of Javert, might, and did in fact, make a mistake.  The impossibility
of approaching too close, his costume of an emigre preceptor,
the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him,
and, finally, the belief in his death in prison, added still
further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert's mind.

For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for
his papers; but if the man was not Jean Valjean, and if this man
was not a good, honest old fellow living on his income, he was
probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the
obscure web of Parisian misdeeds, some chief of a dangerous band,
who gave alms to conceal his other talents, which was an old dodge. 
He had trusty fellows, accomplices' retreats in case of emergencies,
in which he would, no doubt, take refuge.  All these turns which he
was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not
a simple and honest man.  To arrest him too hastily would be "to kill
the hen that laid the golden eggs."  Where was the inconvenience
in waiting?  Javert was very sure that he would not escape.

Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind, putting to
himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage.

It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise, that, thanks to the
brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop, he decidedly recognized
Jean Valjean.

There are in this world two beings who give a profound start,--
the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey. 
Javert gave that profound start.

As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean, the formidable
convict, he perceived that there were only three of them, and he asked
for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise. 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel.

This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult
with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail. 
He speedily divined, however, that Jean Valjean would want to put
the river between his pursuers and himself.  He bent his head and
reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make
sure that he is on the right scent.  Javert, with his powerful
rectitude of instinct, went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz. 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information
which he required:  "Have you seen a man with a little girl?" 
"I made him pay two sous," replied the toll-keeper. Javert reached
the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated
spot on the other side of the water, leading Cosette by the hand. 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine; he remembered
the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap, and of the sole
exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus. He made
sure of his back burrows, as huntsmen say; he hastily despatched
one of his agents, by a roundabout way, to guard that issue. 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him,
he made a requisition on it, and caused it to accompany him. 
In such games soldiers are aces.  Moreover, the principle is, that in
order to get the best of a wild boar, one must employ the science
of venery and plenty of dogs.  These combinations having been effected,
feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot
on the right, his agent on the left, and himself, Javert, in the rear,
he took a pinch of snuff.

Then he began the game.  He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment;
he allowed his man to go on ahead, knowing that he had him safe,
but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible,
happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free,
gloating over him with his gaze, with that voluptuousness of the
spider which allows the fly to flutter, and of the cat which lets
the mouse run.  Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality,--
the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers. 
What a delight this strangling is!

Javert was enjoying himself.  The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted. 
He was sure of success; all he had to do now was to close his hand.

Accompanied as he was, the very idea of resistance was impossible,
however vigorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be.

Javert advanced slowly, sounding, searching on his way all the nooks
of the street like so many pockets of thieves.

When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there.

His exasperation can be imagined.

He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus;
that agent, who had remained imperturbably at his post, had not seen
the man pass.

It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns;
that is to say, he escapes although he has the pack on his
very heels, and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say. 
Duvivier, Ligniville, and Desprez halt short.  In a discomfiture
of this sort, Artonge exclaims, "It was not a stag, but a sorcerer." 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry.

His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage.

It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia,
that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India, that Caesar
made mistakes in the war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the
war in Scythia, and that Javert blundered in this campaign against
Jean Valjean.  He was wrong, perhaps, in hesitating in his recognition
of the exconvict.  The first glance should have sufficed him. 
He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building;
he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him
in the Rue de Pontoise.  He was wrong in taking counsel with his
auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin. 
Advice is certainly useful; it is a good thing to know and to
interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence; but the
hunter cannot be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals
like the wolf and the convict.  Javert, by taking too much thought
as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail,
alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart, and so made him run. 
Above all, he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent
again on the bridge of Austerlitz, he played that formidable
and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread. 
He thought himself stronger than he was, and believed that he could
play at the game of the mouse and the lion.  At the same time,
he reckoned himself as too weak, when he judged it necessary to
obtain reinforcement.  Fatal precaution, waste of precious time! 
Javert committed all these blunders, and none the less was one of
the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed.  He was,
in the full force of the term, what is called in venery a knowing dog. 
But what is there that is perfect?

Great strategists have their eclipses.

The greatest follies are often composed, like the largest ropes,
of a multitude of strands.  Take the cable thread by thread,
take all the petty determining motives separately, and you can break
them one after the other, and you say, "That is all there is of it!" 
Braid them, twist them together; the result is enormous:  it is Attila
hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west;
it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua; it is Danton falling asleep at
Arcis-sur-Aube.

However that may be, even at the moment when he saw that Jean
Valjean had escaped him, Javert did not lose his head. 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off,
he established sentinels, he organized traps and ambuscades,
and beat the quarter all that night.  The first thing he saw
was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut. 
A precious sign which, however, led him astray, since it caused him
to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot. 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on
gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land. 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction.  The fact is,
that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot,
he would probably have done so and have been lost.  Javert explored
these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting
for a needle.

At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook, and returned
to the Prefecture of Police, as much ashamed as a police spy
who had been captured by a robber might have been.



BOOK SIXTH.--LE PETIT-PICPUS


CHAPTER I

NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS


Nothing, half a century ago, more resembled every other carriage gate
than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. This entrance,
which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion, permitted a
view of two things, neither of which have anything very funereal
about them,--a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines,
and the face of a lounging porter.  Above the wall, at the bottom
of the court, tall trees were visible.  When a ray of sunlight
enlivened the courtyard, when a glass of wine cheered up the porter,
it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without
carrying away a smiling impression of it.  Nevertheless, it was
a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse.

The threshold smiled; the house prayed and wept.

If one succeeded in passing the porter, which was not easy,--
which was even nearly impossible for every one, for there was
an open sesame! which it was necessary to know,--if, the porter
once passed, one entered a little vestibule on the right,
on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow
that only one person could ascend it at a time, if one did not
allow one's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow,
with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase, if one
ventured to ascend it, one crossed a first landing, then a second,
and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash
and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency. 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows. 
The corridor took a turn and became dark.  If one doubled this cape,
one arrived a few paces further on, in front of a door which was all
the more mysterious because it was not fastened.  If one opened it,
one found one's self in a little chamber about six feet square,
tiled, well-scrubbed, clean, cold, and hung with nankin paper with
green flowers, at fifteen sous the roll.  A white, dull light fell
from a large window, with tiny panes, on the left, which usurped
the whole width of the room.  One gazed about, but saw no one;
one listened, one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur. 
The walls were bare, the chamber was not furnished; there was not
even a chair.

One looked again, and beheld on the wall facing the door
a quadrangular hole, about a foot square, with a grating of
interlacing iron bars, black, knotted, solid, which formed squares--
I had almost said meshes--of less than an inch and a half in
diagonal length.  The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran
in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars, without being
startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact. 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to
essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole, this grating
would have prevented it.  It did not allow the passage of the body,
but it did allow the passage of the eyes; that is to say, of the mind. 
This seems to have occurred to them, for it had been re-enforced
by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear,
and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes
of a strainer.  At the bottom of this plate, an aperture had been
pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box.  A bit
of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening.

If the tape was pulled, a bell rang, and one heard a voice very near
at hand, which made one start.

"Who is there?" the voice demanded.

It was a woman's voice, a gentle voice, so gentle that it was mournful.

Here, again, there was a magical word which it was necessary to know. 
If one did not know it, the voice ceased, the wall became silent
once more, as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had
been on the other side of it.

If one knew the password, the voice resumed, "Enter on the right."

One then perceived on the right, facing the window, a glass door
surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray.  On raising the latch
and crossing the threshold, one experienced precisely the same
impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire,
before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted. 
One was, in fact, in a sort of theatre-box, narrow, furnished with
two old chairs, and a much-frayed straw matting, sparely illuminated
by the vague light from the glass door; a regular box, with its front
just of a height to lean upon, bearing a tablet of black wood. 
This box was grated, only the grating of it was not of gilded wood,
as at the opera; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars,
hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings
which resembled clenched fists.

The first minutes passed; when one's eyes began to grow used to this
cellar-like half-twilight, one tried to pass the grating, but got no
further than six inches beyond it.  There he encountered a barrier of
black shutters, re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood
painted a gingerbread yellow.  These shutters were divided into long,
narrow slats, and they masked the entire length of the grating. 
They were always closed.  At the expiration of a few moments
one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters, and saying:--

"I am here.  What do you wish with me?"

It was a beloved, sometimes an adored, voice.  No one was visible. 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible.  It seemed as though it
were a spirit which had been evoked, that was speaking to you across
the walls of the tomb.

If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions,
the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you; the evoked
spirit became an apparition.  Behind the grating, behind the shutter,
one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight, a head,
of which only the mouth and the chin were visible; the rest was
covered with a black veil.  One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe,
and a form that was barely defined, covered with a black shroud. 
That head spoke with you, but did not look at you and never smiled
at you.

The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner
that you saw her in the white, and she saw you in the black. 
This light was symbolical.

Nevertheless, your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was
made in that place shut off from all glances.  A profound vagueness
enveloped that form clad in mourning.  Your eyes searched that vagueness,
and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition. 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could
see nothing.  What you beheld was night, emptiness, shadows, a wintry
mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb, a sort of terrible peace,
a silence from which you could gather nothing, not even sighs,
a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing, not even phantoms.

What you beheld was the interior of a cloister.

It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was
called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration. 
The box in which you stood was the parlor.  The first voice which had
addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless
and silent, on the other side of the wall, near the square opening,
screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes,
as by a double visor.  The obscurity which bathed the grated box
arose from the fact that the parlor, which had a window on the side
of the world, had none on the side of the convent.  Profane eyes must
see nothing of that sacred place.

Nevertheless, there was something beyond that shadow; there was
a light; there was life in the midst of that death.  Although this
was the most strictly walled of all convents, we shall endeavor
to make our way into it, and to take the reader in, and to say,
without transgressing the proper bounds, things which story-tellers
have never seen, and have, therefore, never described.



CHAPTER II

THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA


This convent, which in 1824 had already existed for many a long
year in the Rue Petit-Picpus, was a community of Bernardines
of the obedience of Martin Verga.

These Bernardines were attached, in consequence, not to Clairvaux,
like the Bernardine monks, but to Citeaux, like the Benedictine monks. 
In other words, they were the subjects, not of Saint Bernard,
but of Saint Benoit.

Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent
knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation
of Bernardines-Benedictines, with Salamanca
for the head of the order, and Alcala as the branch establishment.

This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic
countries of Europe.

There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one
order on another.  To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit,
which is here in question:  there are attached to this order,
without counting the obedience of Martin Verga, four congregations,--
two in Italy, Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua; two in France,
Cluny and Saint-Maur; and nine orders,--Vallombrosa, Granmont,
the Celestins, the Camaldules, the Carthusians, the Humilies,
the Olivateurs, the Silvestrins, and lastly, Citeaux; for Citeaux itself,
a trunk for other orders, is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit.
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert, Abbe de Molesme, in the diocese
of Langres, in 1098.  Now it was in 529 that the devil, having retired
to the desert of Subiaco--he was old--had he turned hermit?--
was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo, where he dwelt,
by Saint-Benoit, then aged seventeen.

After the rule of the Carmelites, who go barefoot, wear a bit
of willow on their throats, and never sit down, the harshest
rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga. 
They are clothed in black, with a guimpe, which, in accordance
with the express command of Saint-Benoit, mounts to the chin. 
A robe of serge with large sleeves, a large woollen veil, the guimpe
which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast, the band which
descends over their brow to their eyes,--this is their dress. 
All is black except the band, which is white.  The novices wear
the same habit, but all in white.  The professed nuns also wear
a rosary at their side.

The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual
Adoration, like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,
who, at the beginning of this century, had two houses in Paris,--
one at the Temple, the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve. However,
the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus, of whom we are speaking,
were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,
cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple. 
There were numerous differences in their rule; there were some in
their costume.  The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus
wore the black guimpe, and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament
and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one, and had,
besides, on their breasts, a Holy Sacrament about three inches long,
in silver gilt or gilded copper.  The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not
wear this Holy Sacrament.  The Perpetual Adoration, which was common
to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple,
leaves those two orders perfectly distinct.  Their only resemblance
lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the
Bernardines of Martin Verga, just as there existed a similarity
in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating
to the infancy, the life, and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin,
between the two orders, which were, nevertheless, widely separated,
and on occasion even hostile.  The Oratory of Italy, established at
Florence by Philip de Neri, and the Oratory of France, established by
Pierre de Berulle.  The Oratory of France claimed the precedence,
since Philip de Neri was only a saint, while Berulle was a cardinal.

Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga.

The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round,
abstain from meat, fast in Lent and on many other days which are
peculiar to them, rise from their first sleep, from one to three
o'clock in the morning, to read their breviary and chant matins,
sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw, make no use
of the bath, never light a fire, scourge themselves every Friday,
observe the rule of silence, speak to each other only during
the recreation hours, which are very brief, and wear drugget
chemises for six months in the year, from September 14th,
which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, until Easter. 
These six months are a modification:  the rule says all the year,
but this drugget chemise, intolerable in the heat of summer,
produced fevers and nervous spasms.  The use of it had to be restricted. 
Even with this palliation, when the nuns put on this chemise on the
14th of September, they suffer from fever for three or four days. 
Obedience, poverty, chastity, perseverance in their seclusion,--
these are their vows, which the rule greatly aggravates.

The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers, who are
called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter. 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice, which fixes the longest
possible reign of a prioress at nine years.

They never see the officiating priest, who is always hidden from them
by a serge curtain nine feet in height.  During the sermon, when the
preacher is in the chapel, they drop their veils over their faces. 
They must always speak low, walk with their eyes on the ground and
their heads bowed.  One man only is allowed to enter the convent,--
the archbishop of the diocese.

There is really one other,--the gardener.  But he is always an
old man, and, in order that he may always be alone in the garden,
and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him, a bell is attached
to his knee.

Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive. 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation. 
As at the voice of Christ, ut voci Christi, at a gesture,
at the first sign, ad nutum, ad primum signum, immediately,
with cheerfulness, with perseverance, with a certain blind obedience,
prompte, hilariter, perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia,
as the file in the hand of the workman, quasi limam in manibus fabri,
without power to read or to write without express permission,
legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia.

Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation. 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins, for all the faults,
for all the dissensions, for all the violations, for all the iniquities,
for all the crimes committed on earth.  For the space of twelve
consecutive hours, from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock
in the morning, or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock
in the afternoon, the sister who is making reparation remains on her
knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament, with hands clasped,
a rope around her neck.  When her fatigue becomes unendurable,
she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth, with her
arms outstretched in the form of a cross; this is her only relief. 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe. 
This is great to sublimity.

As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle,
it is called without distinction, to make reparation or to be at
the post.  The nuns even prefer, out of humility, this last expression,
which contains an idea of torture and abasement.

To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed. 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt
to fall directly behind her.

Besides this, there is always a sister kneeling before the
Holy Sacrament.  This station lasts an hour.  They relieve
each other like soldiers on guard.  This is the Perpetual Adoration.

The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped
with peculiar solemnity, recalling, not the saints and martyrs,
but moments in the life of Jesus Christ:  as Mother Nativity,
Mother Conception, Mother Presentation, Mother Passion.  But the names
of saints are not interdicted.

When one sees them, one never sees anything but their mouths.

All their teeth are yellow.  No tooth-brush ever entered that convent. 
Brushing one's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is
the loss of one's soul.

They never say my.  They possess nothing of their own, and they must not
attach themselves to anything.  They call everything our; thus:  our veil,
our chaplet; if they were speaking of their chemise, they would say
our chemise.  Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object,--
to a book of hours, a relic, a medal that has been blessed.  As soon
as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object,
they must give it up.  They recall the words of Saint Therese,
to whom a great lady said, as she was on the point of entering
her order, "Permit me, mother, to send for a Bible to which I
am greatly attached."  "Ah, you are attached to something! 
In that case, do not enter our order!"

Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up, to have
a place of her own, a chamber.  They live with their cells open. 
When they meet, one says, "Blessed and adored be the most Holy
Sacrament of the altar!"  The other responds, "Forever."  The same
ceremony when one taps at the other's door.  Hardly has she
touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard
to say hastily, "Forever!"  Like all practices, this becomes
mechanical by force of habit; and one sometimes says forever
before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence,
"Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar."

Among the Visitandines the one who enters says:  "Ave Maria,"
and the one whose cell is entered says, "Gratia plena."  It is their
way of saying good day, which is in fact full of grace.

At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the
church bell of the convent.  At this signal prioress, vocal mothers,
professed nuns, lay-sisters, novices, postulants, interrupt what
they are saying, what they are doing, or what they are thinking,
and all say in unison if it is five o'clock, for instance,
"At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most
Holy Sacrament of the altar!"  If it is eight o'clock, "At eight
o'clock and at all hours!" and so on, according to the hour.

This custom, the object of which is to break the thread of thought
and to lead it back constantly to God, exists in many communities;
the formula alone varies.  Thus at The Infant Jesus they say, "At this
hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart!" 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga, cloistered fifty
years ago at Petit-Picpus, chant the offices to a solemn psalmody,
a pure Gregorian chant, and always with full voice during the whole
course of the office.  Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk
occurs they pause, and say in a low voice, "Jesus-Marie-Joseph." For
the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices
of women can hardly descend to such a depth.  The effect produced is
striking and tragic.

The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand
altar for the burial of their community.  The Government,
as they say, does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they
leave the convent when they die.  This is an affliction to them,
and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules.

They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best,--permission to be
interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient
Vaugirard cemetery, which was made of land which had formerly
belonged to their community.

On Fridays the nuns hear high mass, vespers, and all the offices,
as on Sunday.  They scrupulously observe in addition all the little
festivals unknown to people of the world, of which the Church of France
was so prodigal in the olden days, and of which it is still prodigal
in Spain and Italy.  Their stations in the chapel are interminable. 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better
idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them: 
"The prayers of the postulants are frightful, the prayers of the
novices are still worse, and the prayers of the professed nuns are
still worse."

Once a week the chapter assembles:  the prioress presides;
the vocal mothers assist.  Each sister kneels in turn on the stones,
and confesses aloud, in the presence of all, the faults and sins
which she has committed during the week.  The vocal mothers consult
after each confession and inflict the penance aloud.

Besides this confession in a loud tone, for which all faults
in the least serious are reserved, they have for their venial
offences what they call the coulpe.  To make one's coulpe means
to prostrate one's self flat on one's face during the office
in front of the prioress until the latter, who is never called
anything but our mother, notifies the culprit by a slight tap
of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise. 
The coulpe or peccavi, is made for a very small matter--a broken glass,
a torn veil, an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office,
a false note in church, etc.; this suffices, and the coulpe is made. 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous; it is the culpable person herself
(the word is etymologically in its place here) who judges herself
and inflicts it on herself.  On festival days and Sundays four
mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk
with four places.  One day one of the mother precentors intoned
a psalm beginning with Ecce, and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud
the three notes do si sol; for this piece of absent-mindedness
she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service: 
what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter
had laughed.

When a nun is summoned to the parlor, even were it the prioress herself,
she drops her veil, as will be remembered, so that only her mouth
is visible.

The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers. 
The others can see only their immediate family, and that very rarely. 
If, by chance, an outsider presents herself to see a nun, or one
whom she has known and loved in the outer world, a regular series
of negotiations is required.  If it is a woman, the authorization
may sometimes be granted; the nun comes, and they talk to her
through the shutters, which are opened only for a mother or sister. 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men.

Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit, aggravated by Martin Verga.

These nuns are not gay, rosy, and fresh, as the daughters of other
orders often are.  They are pale and grave.  Between 1825 and 1830
three of them went mad.



CHAPTER III

AUSTERITIES


One is a postulant for two years at least, often for four; a novice
for four.  It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced
earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years. 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows
to their order.

In their cells, they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations,
of which they must never speak.

On the day when a novice makes her profession, she is dressed in her
handsomest attire, she is crowned with white roses, her hair is
brushed until it shines, and curled.  Then she prostrates herself;
a great black veil is thrown over her, and the office for the dead
is sung.  Then the nuns separate into two files; one file passes
close to her, saying in plaintive accents, "Our sister is dead";
and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy, "Our sister is
alive in Jesus Christ!"

At the epoch when this story takes place, a boarding-school
was attached to the convent--a boarding-school for young girls
of noble and mostly wealthy families, among whom could be remarked
Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen, and an English girl
bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot.  These young girls,
reared by these nuns between four walls, grew up with a horror
of the world and of the age.  One of them said to us one day,
"The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot." 
They were dressed in blue, with a white cap and a Holy Spirit
of silver gilt or of copper on their breast.  On certain grand
festival days, particularly Saint Martha's day, they were permitted,
as a high favor and a supreme happiness, to dress themselves
as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit
for a whole day.  In the early days the nuns were in the habit
of lending them their black garments.  This seemed profane, and the
prioress forbade it.  Only the novices were permitted to lend. 
It is remarkable that these performances, tolerated and encouraged,
no doubt, in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism
and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit,
were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars. 
They simply amused themselves with it.  It was new; it gave them
a change.  Candid reasons of childhood, which do not, however,
succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding
a holy water sprinkler in one's hand and standing for hours together
singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk.

The pupils conformed, with the exception of the austerities,
to all the practices of the convent.  There was a certain young
woman who entered the world, and who after many years of married
life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying
in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door, "forever!" 
Like the nuns, the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor. 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them. 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point
was carried.  One day a young girl received a visit from her mother,
who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age. 
The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embrace her sister. 
Impossible.  She begged that, at least, the child might be permitted
to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it. 
This was almost indignantly refused.



CHAPTER IV

GAYETIES


None the less, these young girls filled this grave house with
charming souvenirs.

At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister.  The recreation
hour struck.  A door swung on its hinges.  The birds said,
"Good; here come the children!"  An irruption of youth inundated
that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud.  Radiant faces,
white foreheads, innocent eyes, full of merry light, all sorts of auroras,
were scattered about amid these shadows.  After the psalmodies,
the bells, the peals, and knells and offices, the sound of these little
girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees. 
The hive of joy was opened, and each one brought her honey. 
They played, they called to each other, they formed into groups,
they ran about; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners;
the veils superintended the laughs from a distance, shades kept watch
of the sunbeams, but what mattered it?  Still they beamed and laughed. 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy. 
They looked on, vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much
joy at this sweet swarming of the hives.  It was like a shower
of roses falling athwart this house of mourning.  The young girls
frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns; the gaze of impeccability
does not embarrass innocence.  Thanks to these children, there was,
among so many austere hours, one hour of ingenuousness.  The little
ones skipped about; the elder ones danced.  In this cloister play
was mingled with heaven.  Nothing is so delightful and so august
as all these fresh, expanding young souls.  Homer would have come
thither to laugh with Perrault; and there was in that black garden,
youth, health, noise, cries, giddiness, pleasure, happiness enough
to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses, those of the
epic as well as those of the fairy-tale, those of the throne as well
as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand.

In that house more than anywhere else, perhaps, arise those
children's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile
that is full of thoughtfulness.  It was between those four
gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day: 
"Mother! one of the big girls has just told me that I have
only nine years and ten months longer to remain here.  What happiness!"

It was here, too, that this memorable dialogue took place:--

A Vocal Mother.  Why are you weeping, my child?

The child (aged six). I told Alix that I knew my French history. 
She says that I do not know it, but I do.

Alix, the big girl (aged nine). No; she does not know it.

The Mother.  How is that, my child?

Alix.  She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any
question in the book, and she would answer it.

"Well?"

"She did not answer it."

"Let us see about it.  What did you ask her?"

"I opened the book at random, as she proposed, and I put the first
question that I came across."

"And what was the question?"

"It was, `What happened after that?'"

It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather
greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder:--

"How well bred! it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter
just like a person!"

It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was
once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance,
in order that she might not forget it, by a sinner of seven years:--

"Father, I accuse myself of having been avaricious.

"Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress.

"Father, I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen."

It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth
six years of age improvised the following tale, which was listened
to by blue eyes aged four and five years:--

"There were three little cocks who owned a country where there
were a great many flowers.  They plucked the flowers and put them
in their pockets.  After that they plucked the leaves and put
them in their playthings.  There was a wolf in that country;
there was a great deal of forest; and the wolf was in the forest;
and he ate the little cocks."

And this other poem:--

"There came a blow with a stick.

"It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat.

"It was not good for her; it hurt her.

"Then a lady put Punchinello in prison."

It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom
the convent was bringing up out of charity, uttered this sweet and
heart-breaking saying.  She heard the others talking of their mothers,
and she murmured in her corner:--

"As for me, my mother was not there when I was born!"

There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying
through the corridors with her bunch of keys, and whose name was
Sister Agatha.  The big big girls--those over ten years of age--
called her Agathocles.

The refectory, a large apartment of an oblong square form, which received
no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden,
was dark and damp, and, as the children say, full of beasts. 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects.

Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils,
a special and expressive name.  There was Spider corner,
Caterpillar corner, Wood-louse corner, and Cricket corner.

Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed. 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere.  From the refectory the names
had passed to the boarding-school, and there served as in the old
College Mazarin to distinguish four nations.  Every pupil belonged
to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory
in which she sat at meals.  One day Monseigneur the Archbishop
while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl
with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he
was passing.

He inquired of another pupil, a charming brunette with rosy cheeks,
who stood near him:--

"Who is that?"

"She is a spider, Monseigneur."

"Bah!  And that one yonder?"

"She is a cricket."

"And that one?"

"She is a caterpillar."

"Really! and yourself?"

"I am a wood-louse, Monseigneur."

Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities.  At the beginning
of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where
young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august. 
At Ecouen, in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy
Sacrament, a distinction was made between virgins and florists. 
There were also the "dais" and the "censors,"--the first who held
the cords of the dais, and the others who carried incense before
the Holy Sacrament.  The flowers belonged by right to the florists. 
Four "virgins" walked in advance.  On the morning of that great day
it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory,
"Who is a virgin?"

Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a "little one" of seven years,
to a "big girl" of sixteen, who took the head of the procession,
while she, the little one, remained at the rear, "You are a virgin,
but I am not."



CHAPTER V

DISTRACTIONS


Above the door of the refectory this prayer, which was called
the white Paternoster, and which possessed the property of bearing
people straight to paradise, was inscribed in large black letters:--

"Little white Paternoster, which God made, which God said,
which God placed in paradise.  In the evening, when I went
to bed, I found three angels sitting on my bed, one at the foot,
two at the head, the good Virgin Mary in the middle, who told
me to lie down without hesitation.  The good God is my father,
the good Virgin is my mother, the three apostles are my brothers,
the three virgins are my sisters.  The shirt in which God was born
envelopes my body; Saint Margaret's cross is written on my breast. 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows, weeping for God,
when she met M. Saint John.  `Monsieur Saint John, whence come you?' 
`I come from Ave Salus.'  `You have not seen the good God; where is he?' 
`He is on the tree of the Cross, his feet hanging, his hands nailed,
a little cap of white thorns on his head.'  Whoever shall say this
thrice at eventide, thrice in the morning, shall win paradise at
the last."

In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall
under a triple coating of daubing paint.  At the present time it
is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young
girls then, and who are old women now.

A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration
of this refectory, whose only door, as we think we have mentioned,
opened on the garden.  Two narrow tables, each flanked by two
wooden benches, formed two long parallel lines from one end
to the other of the refectory.  The walls were white, the tables
were black; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety
in convents.  The meals were plain, and the food of the children
themselves severe.  A single dish of meat and vegetables combined,
or salt fish--such was their luxury.  This meagre fare, which was
reserved for the pupils alone, was, nevertheless, an exception. 
The children ate in silence, under the eye of the mother whose
turn it was, who, if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against
the rule, opened and shut a wooden book from time to time. 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints, read aloud
from a little pulpit with a desk, which was situated at the foot of
the crucifix.  The reader was one of the big girls, in weekly turn. 
At regular distances, on the bare tables, there were large,
varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups
and knives and forks, and into which they sometimes threw some scrap
of tough meat or spoiled fish; this was punished.  These bowls were
called ronds d'eau. The child who broke the silence "made a cross
with her tongue."  Where?  On the ground.  She licked the pavement. 
The dust, that end of all joys, was charged with the chastisement
of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping.

There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except
as a unique copy, and which it is forbidden to read.  It is the rule
of Saint-Benoit. An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate. 
Nemo regulas, seu constitutiones nostras, externis communicabit.

The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book,
and set to reading it with avidity, a reading which was often
interrupted by the fear of being caught, which caused them to close
the volume precipitately.

From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate
amount of pleasure.  The most "interesting thing" they found
were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys.

They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby
fruit-trees. In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity
of the punishments administered, when the wind had shaken the trees,
they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled
apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly.  I will now cede the privilege
of speech to a letter which lies before me, a letter written five
and twenty years ago by an old pupil, now Madame la Duchesse de----
one of the most elegant women in Paris.  I quote literally: 
"One hides one's pear or one's apple as best one may. 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper,
one stuffs them under one's pillow and at night one eats them
in bed, and when one cannot do that, one eats them in the closet." 
That was one of their greatest luxuries.

Once--it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent--
one of the young girls, Mademoiselle Bouchard, who was connected
with the Montmorency family, laid a wager that she would ask for
a day's leave of absence--an enormity in so austere a community. 
The wager was accepted, but not one of those who bet believed that she
would do it.  When the moment came, as the archbishop was passing
in front of the pupils, Mademoiselle Bouchard, to the indescribable
terror of her companions, stepped out of the ranks, and said,
"Monseigneur, a day's leave of absence."  Mademoiselle Bouchard
was tall, blooming, with the prettiest little rosy face in the world. 
M. de Quelen smiled and said, "What, my dear child, a day's leave
of absence!  Three days if you like.  I grant you three days." 
The prioress could do nothing; the archbishop had spoken. 
Horror of the convent, but joy of the pupil.  The effect may
be imagined.

This stern cloister was not so well walled off, however, but that the
life of the passions of the outside world, drama, and even romance,
did not make their way in.  To prove this, we will confine
ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real
and incontestable fact, which, however, bears no reference
in itself to, and is not connected by any thread whatever with
the story which we are relating.  We mention the fact for the
sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader's mind.

About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person
who was not a nun, who was treated with great respect, and who
was addressed as Madame Albertine.  Nothing was known about her,
save that she was mad, and that in the world she passed for dead. 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune
necessary for a great marriage.

This woman, hardly thirty years of age, of dark complexion
and tolerably pretty, had a vague look in her large black eyes. 
Could she see?  There was some doubt about this.  She glided rather
than walked, she never spoke; it was not quite known whether
she breathed.  Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding
up their last sigh.  To touch her hand was like touching snow. 
She possessed a strange spectral grace.  Wherever she entered,
people felt cold.  One day a sister, on seeing her pass, said to
another sister, "She passes for a dead woman."  "Perhaps she is one,"
replied the other.

A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine.  This arose from the
eternal curiosity of the pupils.  In the chapel there was a gallery
called L'OEil de Boeuf.  It was in this gallery, which had only
a circular bay, an oeil de boeuf, that Madame Albertine listened
to the offices.  She always occupied it alone because this gallery,
being on the level of the first story, the preacher or the
officiating priest could be seen, which was interdicted to the nuns. 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank,
M. Le Duc de Rohan, peer of France, officer of the Red Musketeers
in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon, and who died afterward,
in 1830, as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon.  It was the first
time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent. 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete
immobility during the sermons and services.  That day, as soon
as she caught sight of M. de Rohan, she half rose, and said, in a
loud voice, amid the silence of the chapel, "Ah!  Auguste!"  The whole
community turned their heads in amazement, the preacher raised
his eyes, but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility. 
A breath from the outer world, a flash of life, had passed for an
instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished,
and the mad woman had become a corpse again.

Those two words, however, had set every one in the convent who
had the privilege of speech to chattering.  How many things were
contained in that "Ah!  Auguste!" what revelations!  M. de Rohan's
name really was Auguste.  It was evident that Madame Albertine
belonged to the very highest society, since she knew M. de Rohan,
and that her own rank there was of the highest, since she spoke
thus familiarly of so great a lord, and that there existed between
them some connection, of relationship, perhaps, but a very close
one in any case, since she knew his "pet name."

Two very severe duchesses, Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent,
often visited the community, whither they penetrated, no doubt,
in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres, and caused great
consternation in the boarding-school. When these two old ladies
passed by, all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes.

Moreover, M. de Rohan, quite unknown to himself, was an object of
attention to the school-girls. At that epoch he had just been made,
while waiting for the episcopate, vicar-general of the Archbishop
of Paris.  It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate
the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus. Not one
of the young recluses could see him, because of the serge curtain,
but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice, which they had come
to know and to distinguish.  He had been a mousquetaire, and then,
he was said to be very coquettish, that his handsome brown hair
was very well dressed in a roll around his head, and that he had
a broad girdle of magnificent moire, and that his black cassock
was of the most elegant cut in the world.  He held a great place
in all these imaginations of sixteen years.

Not a sound from without made its way into the convent.  But there
was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither. 
This was an event, and the girls who were at school there at the time
still recall it.

It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood.  This flute
always played the same air, an air which is very far away
nowadays,--"My Zetulbe, come reign o'er my soul,"--and it was heard
two or three times a day.  The young girls passed hours in listening
to it, the vocal mothers were upset by it, brains were busy,
punishments descended in showers.  This lasted for several months. 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician. 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe.  The sound of the flute
proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur; and they would
have given anything, compromised everything, attempted anything
for the sake of seeing, of catching a glance, if only for a second,
of the "young man" who played that flute so deliciously, and who,
no doubt, played on all these souls at the same time.  There were some
who made their escape by a back door, and ascended to the third story
on the Rue Droit-Mur side, in order to attempt to catch a glimpse
through the gaps.  Impossible!  One even went so far as to thrust
her arm through the grating, and to wave her white handkerchief. 
Two were still bolder.  They found means to climb on a roof, and risked
their lives there, and succeeded at last in seeing "the young man." 
He was an old emigre gentleman, blind and penniless, who was playing
his flute in his attic, in order to pass the time.



CHAPTER VI

THE LITTLE CONVENT


In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly
distinct buildings,--the Great Convent, inhabited by the nuns,
the Boarding-school, where the scholars were lodged; and lastly,
what was called the Little Convent.  It was a building with a garden,
in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders, the relics
of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution; a reunion of all the black,
gray, and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties;
what might be called, if such a coupling of words is permissible,
a sort of harlequin convent.

When the Empire was established, all these poor old dispersed and
exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter
under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines. The government
paid them a small pension, the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received
them cordially.  It was a singular pell-mell. Each followed her
own rule, Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed,
as a great recreation, to pay them a visit; the result is,
that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs
that of Mother Sainte-Bazile, Mother Sainte-Scolastique, and Mother Jacob.

One of these refugees found herself almost at home.  She was a nun
of Sainte-Aure, the only one of her order who had survived. 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied,
at the beginning of the eighteenth century, this very house
of the Petit-Picpus, which belonged later to the Benedictines
of Martin Verga.  This holy woman, too poor to wear the magnificent
habit of her order, which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary,
had piously put it on a little manikin, which she exhibited with
complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death. 
In 1824, only one nun of this order remained; to-day, there remains
only a doll.

In addition to these worthy mothers, some old society women
had obtained permission of the prioress, like Madame Albertine,
to retire into the Little Convent.  Among the number were Madame
Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne.  Another was never known
in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when
she blew her nose.  The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini (hubbub).

About 1820 or 1821, Madame de Genlis, who was at that time editing
a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide, asked to be
allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident. 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her.  Uproar in the hive; the vocal-mothers
were all in a flutter; Madame de Genlis had made romances. 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them, and then,
she had reached her fierce stage of devotion.  With the aid of God,
and of the Prince, she entered.  She departed at the end of six
or eight months, alleging as a reason, that there was no shade
in the garden.  The nuns were delighted.  Although very old,
she still played the harp, and did it very well.

When she went away she left her mark in her cell.  Madame de Genlis
was superstitious and a Latinist.  These two words furnish a tolerably
good profile of her.  A few years ago, there were still to be seen,
pasted in the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she
locked up her silverware and her jewels, these five lines in Latin,
written with her own hand in red ink on yellow paper, and which,
in her opinion, possessed the property of frightening away robbers:--


               Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis:[15]
               Dismas et Gesmas, media est divina potestas;
               Alta petit Dismas, infelix, infima, Gesmas;
               Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas.
               Hos versus dicas, ne tu furto tua perdas.


[15] On the boughs hang three bodies of unequal merits: 
Dismas and Gesmas, between is the divine power.  Dismas seeks
the heights, Gesmas, unhappy man, the lowest regions; the highest
power will preserve us and our effects.  If you repeat this verse,
you will not lose your things by theft.


These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether
the two thieves of Calvary were named, as is commonly believed,
Dismas and Gestas, or Dismas and Gesmas.  This orthography might
have confounded the pretensions put forward in the last century
by the Vicomte de Gestas, of a descent from the wicked thief. 
However, the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an article
of faith in the order of the Hospitallers.

The church of the house, constructed in such a manner as to separate
the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment,
was, of course, common to the Boarding-school, the Great Convent,
and the Little Convent.  The public was even admitted by a sort
of lazaretto entrance on the street.  But all was so arranged,
that none of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face
from the outside world.  Suppose a church whose choir is grasped
in a gigantic hand, and folded in such a manner as to form, not,
as in ordinary churches, a prolongation behind the altar, but a sort
of hall, or obscure cellar, to the right of the officiating priest;
suppose this hall to be shut off by a curtain seven feet in height,
of which we have already spoken; in the shadow of that curtain,
pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the left,
the school-girls on the right, the lay-sisters and the novices at
the bottom, and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus
assisting at divine service.  That cavern, which was called the choir,
communicated with the cloister by a lobby.  The church was lighted
from the garden.  When the nuns were present at services where their
rule enjoined silence, the public was warned of their presence
only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling.



CHAPTER VII

SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS


During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825, the prioress of
the Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur, whose name, in religion,
was Mother Innocente.  She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur,
author of Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoit. She
had been re-elected. She was a woman about sixty years of age,
short, thick, "singing like a cracked pot," says the letter which we
have already quoted; an excellent woman, moreover, and the only
merry one in the whole convent, and for that reason adored. 
She was learned, erudite, wise, competent, curiously proficient
in history, crammed with Latin, stuffed with Greek, full of Hebrew,
and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun.

The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun, Mother Cineres, who was
almost blind.

The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine;
the treasurer, Mother Sainte-Gertrude, the chief mistress of the novices;
Mother-Saint-Ange, the assistant mistress; Mother Annonciation,
the sacristan; Mother Saint-Augustin, the nurse, the only one
in the convent who was malicious; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde
(Mademoiselle Gauvain), very young and with a beautiful voice;
Mother des Anges (Mademoiselle Drouet), who had been in the convent
of the Filles-Dieu, and in the convent du Tresor, between Gisors
and Magny; Mother Saint-Joseph (Mademoiselle de Cogolludo), Mother
Sainte-Adelaide (Mademoiselle d'Auverney), Mother Misericorde
(Mademoiselle de Cifuentes, who could not resist austerities),
Mother Compassion (Mademoiselle de la Miltiere, received at
the age of sixty in defiance of the rule, and very wealthy);
Mother Providence (Mademoiselle de Laudiniere), Mother Presentation
(Mademoiselle de Siguenza), who was prioress in 1847; and finally,
Mother Sainte-Celigne (sister of the sculptor Ceracchi), who went mad;
Mother Sainte-Chantal (Mademoiselle de Suzon), who went mad.

There was also, among the prettiest of them, a charming girl of
three and twenty, who was from the Isle de Bourbon, a descendant
of the Chevalier Roze, whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze,
and who was called Mother Assumption.

Mother Sainte-Mechtilde, intrusted with the singing and the choir,
was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter.  She usually
took a complete scale of them, that is to say, seven, from ten
to sixteen years of age, inclusive, of assorted voices and sizes,
whom she made sing standing, drawn up in a line, side by side,
according to age, from the smallest to the largest.  This presented
to the eye, something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls,
a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels.

Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister
Euphrasie, Sister Sainte-Marguerite, Sister Sainte-Marthe, who was
in her dotage, and Sister Sainte-Michel, whose long nose made them laugh.

All these women were gentle with the children.  The nuns were severe
only towards themselves.  No fire was lighted except in the school,
and the food was choice compared to that in the convent. 
Moreover, they lavished a thousand cares on their scholars.  Only,
when a child passed near a nun and addressed her, the nun never replied.

This rule of silence had had this effect, that throughout the
whole convent, speech had been withdrawn from human creatures,
and bestowed on inanimate objects.  Now it was the church-bell
which spoke, now it was the gardener's bell.  A very sonorous bell,
placed beside the portress, and which was audible throughout
the house, indicated by its varied peals, which formed a sort
of acoustic telegraph, all the actions of material life which were
to be performed, and summoned to the parlor, in case of need,
such or such an inhabitant of the house.  Each person and each thing
had its own peal.  The prioress had one and one, the sub-prioress
one and two.  Six-five announced lessons, so that the pupils never
said "to go to lessons," but "to go to six-five." Four-four was
Madame de Genlis's signal.  It was very often heard.  "C'est le
diable a quatre,--it's the very deuce--said the uncharitable. 
Tennine strokes announced a great event.  It was the opening of the
door of seclusion, a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts
which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop.

With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener, no man
entered the convent, as we have already said.  The schoolgirls
saw two others:  one, the chaplain, the Abbe Banes, old and ugly,
whom they were permitted to contemplate in the choir, through a grating;
the other the drawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom the letter,
of which we have perused a few lines, calls M. Anciot, and describes
as a frightful old hunchback.

It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen.

Such was this curious house.



CHAPTER VIII

POST CORDA LAPIDES


After having sketched its moral face, it will not prove unprofitable
to point out, in a few words, its material configuration. 
The reader already has some idea of it.

The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the
whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection
of the Rue Polonceau, the Rue Droit-Mur, the Rue Petit-Picpus,
and the unused lane, called Rue Aumarais on old plans. 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat. 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden. 
The principal building, taken in its entirety, was a juxtaposition
of hybrid constructions which, viewed from a bird's-eye view, outlined,
with considerable exactness, a gibbet laid flat on the ground. 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment
of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and
the Rue Polonceau; the lesser arm was a lofty, gray, severe grated
facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus; the carriage entrance No. 62
marked its extremity.  Towards the centre of this facade was a low,
arched door, whitened with dust and ashes, where the spiders wove
their webs, and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays,
and on rare occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the convent. 
This was the public entrance of the church.  The elbow of the gibbet
was a square hall which was used as the servants' hall, and which
the nuns called the buttery.  In the main arm were the cells
of the mothers, the sisters, and the novices.  In the lesser arm
lay the kitchens, the refectory, backed up by the cloisters and
the church.  Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed
lane Aumarais, was the school, which was not visible from without. 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden, which was much
lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau, which caused the walls
to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside. 
The garden, which was slightly arched, had in its centre, on the
summit of a hillock, a fine pointed and conical fir-tree, whence ran,
as from the peaked boss of a shield, four grand alleys, and,
ranged by twos in between the branchings of these, eight small ones,
so that, if the enclosure had been circular, the geometrical plan
of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel. 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden,
they were of unequal length.  They were bordered with currant bushes. 
At the bottom, an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the
old convent, which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house
of the Little Convent, which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane. 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden. 
To this whole, let the reader add a courtyard, all sorts of varied
angles formed by the interior buildings, prison walls, the long
black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue
Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood, and he will
be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house
of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago. 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous
tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, which was
called the "tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils."

All these streets, moreover, were more ancient than Paris.  These names,
Droit-Mur and Aumarais, are very ancient; the streets which bear
them are very much more ancient still.  Aumarais Lane was called
Maugout Lane; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers,
for God opened flowers before man cut stones.



CHAPTER IX

A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE


Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent
of the Petit-Picpus was in former times, and since we have ventured
to open a window on that discreet retreat, the reader will permit
us one other little digression, utterly foreign to this book,
but characteristic and useful, since it shows that the cloister
even has its original figures.

In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey
of Fontevrault.  She had even been in society before the Revolution. 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil, Keeper of the Seals
under Louis XVI.  and of a Presidentess Duplat, with whom she had been
very intimate.  It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these
names on every pretext.  She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault,--
that it was like a city, and that there were streets in the monastery.

She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils.  Every year,
she solemnly renewed her vows, and at the moment of taking the oath,
she said to the priest, "Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it
to Monseigneur Saint-Julien, Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it
to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius, Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave
it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius, etc., etc.; and thus I give
it to you, father."  And the school-girls would begin to laugh,
not in their sleeves, but under their veils; charming little
stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown.

On another occasion, the centenarian was telling stories.  She said
that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as
the mousquetaires.  It was a century which spoke through her, but it
was the eighteenth century.  She told about the custom of the four wines,
which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne. 
When a great personage, a marshal of France, a prince, a duke,
and a peer, traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne, the city
fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver
gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine. 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read, monkey wine;
on the second, lion wine; on the third, sheep wine; on the fourth,
hog wine.  These four legends express the four stages descended
by the drunkard; the first, intoxication, which enlivens; the second,
that which irritates; the third, that which dulls; and the fourth,
that which brutalizes.

In a cupboard, under lock and key, she kept a mysterious object
of which she thought a great deal.  The rule of Fontevrault did
not forbid this.  She would not show this object to anyone. 
She shut herself up, which her rule allowed her to do,
and hid herself, every time that she desired to contemplate it. 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor, she closed the cupboard
again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands.  As soon
as it was mentioned to her, she became silent, she who was so fond
of talking.  The most curious were baffled by her silence and the
most tenacious by her obstinacy.  Thus it furnished a subject of
comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent. 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be, which was so precious
and so secret?  Some holy book, no doubt?  Some unique chaplet? 
Some authentic relic?  They lost themselves in conjectures. 
When the poor old woman died, they rushed to her cupboard more
hastily than was fitting, perhaps, and opened it.  They found the
object beneath a triple linen cloth, like some consecrated paten. 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting
away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes. 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures.  One of the
charming little Loves is already fairly spitted.  He is resisting,
fluttering his tiny wings, and still making an effort to fly,
but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air.  Moral:  Love conquered
by the colic.  This platter, which is very curious, and which had,
possibly, the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea, was still
in existence in September, 1845; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac
merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais.

This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because,
said she, the parlor is too gloomy.



CHAPTER X

ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION


However, this almost sepulchral parlor, of which we have sought
to convey an idea, is a purely local trait which is not reproduced
with the same severity in other convents.  At the convent of the Rue
du Temple, in particular, which belonged, in truth, to another order,
the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains, and the parlor
itself was a salon with a polished wood floor, whose windows were
draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts
of frames, a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face,
painted bouquets, and even the head of a Turk.

It is in that garden of the Temple convent, that stood that famous
chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest
in France, and which bore the reputation among the good people
of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut
trees of the realm.

As we have said, this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines
of the Perpetual Adoration, Benedictines quite different from those
who depended on Citeaux.  This order of the Perpetual Adoration is
not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years. 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few
days apart, in two churches in Paris, at Saint-Sulpice and at
Saint-Jean en Greve, a rare and frightful sacrilege which set
the whole town in an uproar.  M. the Prior and Vicar-General of
Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy,
in which the Pope's Nuncio officiated.  But this expiation did
not satisfy two sainted women, Madame Courtin, Marquise de Boucs,
and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux.  This outrage committed on "the
most holy sacrament of the altar," though but temporary, would not
depart from these holy souls, and it seemed to them that it could only
be extenuated by a "Perpetual Adoration" in some female monastery. 
Both of them, one in 1652, the other in 1653, made donations of notable
sums to Mother Catherine de Bar, called of the Holy Sacrament,
a Benedictine nun, for the purpose of founding, to this pious end,
a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit; the first permission for
this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz,
Abbe of Saint-Germain, "on condition that no woman could be
received unless she contributed three hundred livres income,
which amounts to six thousand livres, to the principal." 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain, the king accorded letters-patent;
and all the rest, abbatial charter, and royal letters, was confirmed
in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament.

Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment
of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament
at Paris.  Their first convent was "a new building" in the Rue Cassette,
out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux.

This order, as it will be seen, was not to be confounded with
the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux.  It mounted back to the Abbe
of Saint-Germain des Pres, in the same manner that the ladies
of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits,
and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists.

It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus,
whose interior we have just shown.  In 1657, Pope Alexander VII. 
had authorized, by a special brief, the Bernardines of the Rue
Petit-Picpus, to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine
nuns of the Holy Sacrament.  But the two orders remained distinct
none the less.



CHAPTER XI

END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS


At the beginning of the Restoration, the convent of the Petit-Picpus
was in its decay; this forms a part of the general death of the order,
which, after the eighteenth century, has been disappearing like
all the religious orders.  Contemplation is, like prayer, one of
humanity's needs; but, like everything which the Revolution touched,
it will be transformed, and from being hostile to social progress,
it will become favorable to it.

The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated. 
In 1840, the Little Convent had disappeared, the school had disappeared. 
There were no longer any old women, nor young girls; the first
were dead, the latter had taken their departure.  Volaverunt.

The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature
that it alarms, vocations recoil before it, the order receives
no recruits.  In 1845, it still obtained lay-sisters here and there. 
But of professed nuns, none at all.  Forty years ago, the nuns
numbered nearly a hundred; fifteen years ago there were not more
than twenty-eight of them.  How many are there to-day? In 1847,
the prioress was young, a sign that the circle of choice was restricted. 
She was not forty years old.  In proportion as the number diminishes,
the fatigue increases, the service of each becomes more painful;
the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be
but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of
Saint-Benoit. The burden is implacable, and remains the same for the
few as for the many.  It weighs down, it crushes.  Thus they die. 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris,
two died.  One was twenty-five years old, the other twenty-three.
This latter can say, like Julia Alpinula:  "Hic jaceo.  Vixi annos
viginti et tres."  It is in consequence of this decay that the convent
gave up the education of girls.

We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house
without entering it, and without introducing the minds which
accompany us, and which are listening to our tale, to the profit
of some, perchance, of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean. 
We have penetrated into this community, full of those old practices
which seem so novel to-day. It is the closed garden, hortus conclusus. 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail, but with respect,
in so far, at least, as detail and respect are compatible. 
We do not understand all, but we insult nothing.  We are equally
far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre, who wound up
by anointing the executioner, and from the sneer of Voltaire,
who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross.

An illogical act on Voltaire's part, we may remark, by the way;
for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas;
and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations, what does the
crucifix represent?  The assassinated sage.

In this nineteenth century, the religious idea is undergoing
a crisis.  People are unlearning certain things, and they do well,
provided that, while unlearning them they learn this:  There is
no vacuum in the human heart.  Certain demolitions take place,
and it is well that they do, but on condition that they are followed
by reconstructions.

In the meantime, let us study things which are no more.  It is necessary
to know them, if only for the purpose of avoiding them.  The counterfeits
of the past assume false names, and gladly call themselves the future. 
This spectre, this past, is given to falsifying its own passport. 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap.  Let us be on our guard. 
The past has a visage, superstition, and a mask, hypocrisy.  Let us
denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask.

As for convents, they present a complex problem,--a question
of civilization, which condemns them; a question of liberty,
which protects them.




BOOK SEVENTH.--PARENTHESIS



CHAPTER I

THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA


This book is a drama, whose leading personage is the Infinite.

Man is the second.

Such being the case, and a convent having happened to be on our road,
it has been our duty to enter it.  Why?  Because the convent,
which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident,
to antiquity as well as to modern times, to paganism, to Buddhism,
to Mahometanism, as well as to Christianity, is one of the optical
apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite.

This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on
certain ideas; nevertheless, while absolutely maintaining
our reserves, our restrictions, and even our indignations, we must
say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite, either well
or ill understood, we feel ourselves overpowered with respect. 
There is, in the synagogue, in the mosque, in the pagoda,
in the wigwam, a hideous side which we execrate, and a sublime side,
which we adore.  What a contemplation for the mind, and what endless
food for thought, is the reverberation of God upon the human wall!



CHAPTER II

THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT


From the point of view of history, of reason, and of truth,
monasticism is condemned.  Monasteries, when they abound in a nation,
are clogs in its circulation, cumbrous establishments, centres of
idleness where centres of labor should exist.  Monastic communities
are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak,
what the wart is to the human body.  Their prosperity and their
fatness mean the impoverishment of the country.  The monastic regime,
good at the beginning of civilization, useful in the reduction
of the brutal by the spiritual, is bad when peoples have reached
their manhood.  Moreover, when it becomes relaxed, and when it
enters into its period of disorder, it becomes bad for the very
reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity,
because it still continues to set the example.

Claustration has had its day.  Cloisters, useful in the early education
of modern civilization, have embarrassed its growth, and are injurious
to its development.  So far as institution and formation with relation
to man are concerned, monasteries, which were good in the tenth century,
questionable in the fifteenth, are detestable in the nineteenth. 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two
wonderful nations, Italy and Spain; the one the light, the other
the splendor of Europe for centuries; and, at the present day,
these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce,
thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone.

The convent--the ancient female convent in particular, such as it still
presents itself on the threshold of this century, in Italy, in Austria,
in Spain--is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages. 
The cloister, that cloister, is the point of intersection of horrors. 
The Catholic cloister, properly speaking, is wholly filled with the
black radiance of death.

The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all.  There rise,
in obscurity, beneath vaults filled with gloom, beneath domes
vague with shadow, massive altars of Babel, as high as cathedrals;
there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark;
there are extended, all nude on the ebony, great Christs of ivory;
more than bleeding,--bloody; hideous and magnificent, with their elbows
displaying the bones, their knee-pans showing their integuments,
their wounds showing their flesh, crowned with silver thorns,
nailed with nails of gold, with blood drops of rubies on their brows,
and diamond tears in their eyes.  The diamonds and rubies seem wet,
and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep, their sides bruised
with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges, their breasts
crushed with wicker hurdles, their knees excoriated with prayer;
women who think themselves wives, spectres who think themselves seraphim. 
Do these women think?  No. Have they any will?  No. Do they love? 
No. Do they live?  No. Their nerves have turned to bone; their bones
have turned to stone.  Their veil is of woven night.  Their breath
under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration
of death.  The abbess, a spectre, sanctifies them and terrifies them. 
The immaculate one is there, and very fierce.  Such are the ancient
monasteries of Spain.  Liars of terrible devotion, caverns of virgins,
ferocious places.

Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself.  The Spanish convent was,
above all others, the Catholic convent.  There was a flavor of
the Orient about it.  The archbishop, the kislar-aga of heaven,
locked up and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved
for God.  The nun was the odalisque, the priest was the eunuch. 
The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ. 
At night, the beautiful, nude young man descended from the cross
and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one.  Lofty walls guarded
the mystic sultana, who had the crucified for her sultan, from all
living distraction.  A glance on the outer world was infidelity. 
The in pace replaced the leather sack.  That which was cast into
the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West. 
In both quarters, women wrung their hands; the waves for the first,
the grave for the last; here the drowned, there the buried. 
Monstrous parallel.

To-day the upholders of the past, unable to deny these things,
have adopted the expedient of smiling at them.  There has come into
fashion a strange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations
of history, of invalidating the commentaries of philosophy,
of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions.  A matter
for declamations, say the clever.  Declamations, repeat the foolish. 
Jean-Jacques a declaimer; Diderot a declaimer; Voltaire on Calas,
Labarre, and Sirven, declaimers.  I know not who has recently
discovered that Tacitus was a declaimer, that Nero was a victim,
and that pity is decidedly due to "that poor Holofernes."

Facts, however, are awkward things to disconcert, and they are obstinate. 
The author of this book has seen, with his own eyes, eight leagues
distant from Brussels,--there are relics of the Middle Ages there
which are attainable for everybody,--at the Abbey of Villers,
the hole of the oubliettes, in the middle of the field which was
formerly the courtyard of the cloister, and on the banks of the Thil,
four stone dungeons, half under ground, half under the water. 
They were in pace.  Each of these dungeons has the remains of an
iron door, a vault, and a grated opening which, on the outside,
is two feet above the level of the river, and on the inside,
six feet above the level of the ground.  Four feet of river flow
past along the outside wall.  The ground is always soaked. 
The occupant of the in pace had this wet soil for his bed. 
In one of these dungeons, there is a fragment of an iron necklet
riveted to the wall; in another, there can be seen a square box made
of four slabs of granite, too short for a person to lie down in,
too low for him to stand upright in.  A human being was put inside,
with a coverlid of stone on top.  This exists.  It can be seen. 
It can be touched.  These in pace, these dungeons, these iron hinges,
these necklets, that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river's current,
that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb,
with this difference, that the dead man here was a living being,
that soil which is but mud, that vault hole, those oozing walls,--
what declaimers!



CHAPTER III

ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST


Monasticism, such as it existed in Spain, and such as it still
exists in Thibet, is a sort of phthisis for civilization.  It stops
life short.  It simply depopulates.  Claustration, castration. 
It has been the scourge of Europe.  Add to this the violence so often
done to the conscience, the forced vocations, feudalism bolstered
up by the cloister, the right of the first-born pouring the excess
of the family into monasticism, the ferocities of which we have
just spoken, the in pace, the closed mouths, the walled-up brains,
so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows,
the taking of the habit, the interment of living souls. 
Add individual tortures to national degradations, and, whoever you
may be, you will shudder before the frock and the veil,--those two
winding-sheets of human devising.  Nevertheless, at certain points
and in certain places, in spite of philosophy, in spite of progress,
the spirit of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth
century, and a singular ascetic recrudescence is, at this moment,
astonishing the civilized world.  The obstinacy of antiquated
institutions in perpetuating themselves resembles the stubbornness
of the rancid perfume which should claim our hair, the pretensions
of the spoiled fish which should persist in being eaten, the persecution
of the child's garment which should insist on clothing the man,
the tenderness of corpses which should return to embrace the living.

"Ingrates!" says the garment, "I protected you in inclement weather. 
Why will you have nothing to do with me?"  "I have just come from the
deep sea," says the fish.  "I have been a rose," says the perfume. 
"I have loved you," says the corpse.  "I have civilized you,"
says the convent.

To this there is but one reply:  "In former days."

To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things, and of the
government of men by embalming, to restore dogmas in a bad condition,
to regild shrines, to patch up cloisters, to rebless reliquaries,
to refurnish superstitions, to revictual fanaticisms, to put
new handles on holy water brushes and militarism, to reconstitute
monasticism and militarism, to believe in the salvation of society
by the multiplication of parasites, to force the past on the present,--
this seems strange.  Still, there are theorists who hold such theories. 
These theorists, who are in other respects people of intelligence,
have a very simple process; they apply to the past a glazing which
they call social order, divine right, morality, family, the respect
of elders, antique authority, sacred tradition, legitimacy, religion;
and they go about shouting, "Look! take this, honest people." 
This logic was known to the ancients.  The soothsayers practise it. 
They rubbed a black heifer over with chalk, and said, "She is white,
Bos cretatus."

As for us, we respect the past here and there, and we spare it,
above all, provided that it consents to be dead.  If it insists on
being alive, we attack it, and we try to kill it.

Superstitions, bigotries, affected devotion, prejudices, those forms
all forms as they are, are tenacious of life; they have teeth and
nails in their smoke, and they must be clasped close, body to body,
and war must be made on them, and that without truce; for it is one
of the fatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat
with phantoms.  It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat,
and to hurl it to the earth.

A convent in France, in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century,
is a college of owls facing the light.  A cloister, caught in the
very act of asceticism, in the very heart of the city of '89 and of
1830 and of 1848, Rome blossoming out in Paris, is an anachronism. 
In ordinary times, in order to dissolve an anachronism and to
cause it to vanish, one has only to make it spell out the date. 
But we are not in ordinary times.

Let us fight.

Let us fight, but let us make a distinction.  The peculiar
property of truth is never to commit excesses.  What need has it
of exaggeration?  There is that which it is necessary to destroy,
and there is that which it is simply necessary to elucidate
and examine.  What a force is kindly and serious examination! 
Let us not apply a flame where only a light is required.

So, given the nineteenth century, we are opposed, as a general
proposition, and among all peoples, in Asia as well as in Europe,
in India as well as in Turkey, to ascetic claustration. 
Whoever says cloister, says marsh.  Their putrescence is evident,
their stagnation is unhealthy, their fermentation infects people
with fever, and etiolates them; their multiplication becomes a
plague of Egypt.  We cannot think without affright of those lands
where fakirs, bonzes, santons, Greek monks, marabouts, talapoins,
and dervishes multiply even like swarms of vermin.

This said, the religious question remains.  This question has
certain mysterious, almost formidable sides; may we be permitted
to look at it fixedly.



CHAPTER IV

THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES


Men unite themselves and dwell in communities.  By virtue of what right? 
By virtue of the right of association.

They shut themselves up at home.  By virtue of what right? 
By virtue of the right which every man has to open or shut his door.

They do not come forth.  By virtue of what right?  By virtue of
the right to go and come, which implies the right to remain at home.

There, at home, what do they do?

They speak in low tones; they drop their eyes; they toil. 
They renounce the world, towns, sensualities, pleasures, vanities,
pride, interests.  They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen. 
Not one of them possesses in his own right anything whatever. 
On entering there, each one who was rich makes himself poor. 
What he has, he gives to all.  He who was what is called noble,
a gentleman and a lord, is the equal of him who was a peasant. 
The cell is identical for all.  All undergo the same tonsure,
wear the same frock, eat the same black bread, sleep on the same straw,
die on the same ashes.  The same sack on their backs, the same rope
around their loins.  If the decision has been to go barefoot,
all go barefoot.  There may be a prince among them; that prince
is the same shadow as the rest.  No titles.  Even family names
have disappeared.  They bear only first names.  All are bowed
beneath the equality of baptismal names.  They have dissolved the
carnal family, and constituted in their community a spiritual family. 
They have no other relatives than all men.  They succor the poor,
they care for the sick.  They elect those whom they obey.  They call
each other "my brother."

You stop me and exclaim, "But that is the ideal convent!"

It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent, that I
should take notice of it.

Thence it results that, in the preceding book, I have spoken
of a convent with respectful accents.  The Middle Ages cast aside,
Asia cast aside, the historical and political question held
in reserve, from the purely philosophical point of view, outside the
requirements of militant policy, on condition that the monastery
shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only
consenting parties, I shall always consider a cloistered community
with a certain attentive, and, in some respects, a deferential gravity.

Wherever there is a community, there is a commune; where there
is a commune, there is right.  The monastery is the product of
the formula:  Equality, Fraternity.  Oh! how grand is liberty! 
And what a splendid transfiguration!  Liberty suffices to transform
the monastery into a republic.

Let us continue.

But these men, or these women who are behind these four walls. 
They dress themselves in coarse woollen, they are equals, they call
each other brothers, that is well; but they do something else?

Yes.

What?

They gaze on the darkness, they kneel, and they clasp their hands.

What does this signify?



CHAPTER V

PRAYER


They pray.

To whom?

To God.

To pray to God,--what is the meaning of these words?

Is there an infinite beyond us?  Is that infinite there, inherent,
permanent; necessarily substantial, since it is infinite; and because,
if it lacked matter it would be bounded; necessarily intelligent,
since it is infinite, and because, if it lacked intelligence, it would
end there?  Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence,
while we can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence? 
In other terms, is it not the absolute, of which we are only the relative?

At the same time that there is an infinite without us, is there
not an infinite within us?  Are not these two infinites (what an
alarming plural!) superposed, the one upon the other?  Is not this
second infinite, so to speak, subjacent to the first?  Is it not
the latter's mirror, reflection, echo, an abyss which is concentric
with another abyss?  Is this second infinity intelligent also? 
Does it think?  Does it love?  Does it will?  If these two infinities
are intelligent, each of them has a will principle, and there is an
_I_ in the upper infinity as there is an _I_ in the lower infinity. 
The _I_ below is the soul; the _I_ on high is God.

To place the infinity here below in contact, by the medium of thought,
with the infinity on high, is called praying.

Let us take nothing from the human mind; to suppress is bad. 
We must reform and transform.  Certain faculties in man are directed
towards the Unknown; thought, revery, prayer.  The Unknown is
an ocean.  What is conscience?  It is the compass of the Unknown. 
Thought, revery, prayer,--these are great and mysterious radiations. 
Let us respect them.  Whither go these majestic irradiations
of the soul?  Into the shadow; that is to say, to the light.

The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing
of humanity.  Close to the right of the man, beside it, at the least,
there exists the right of the soul.

To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite, such is the law. 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree
of creation, and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars. 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul, to defend the mystery
against the miracle, to adore the incomprehensible and reject
the absurd, to admit, as an inexplicable fact, only what is necessary,
to purify belief, to remove superstitions from above religion;
to clear God of caterpillars.



CHAPTER VI

THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER


With regard to the modes of prayer, all are good, provided that they
are sincere.  Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite.

There is, as we know, a philosophy which denies the infinite. 
There is also a philosophy, pathologically classified, which denies
the sun; this philosophy is called blindness.

To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth, is a fine
blind man's self-sufficiency.

The curious thing is the haughty, superior, and compassionate
airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy
which beholds God.  One fancies he hears a mole crying, "I pity
them with their sun!"

There are, as we know, powerful and illustrious atheists.  At bottom,
led back to the truth by their very force, they are not absolutely sure
that they are atheists; it is with them only a question of definition,
and in any case, if they do not believe in God, being great minds,
they prove God.

We salute them as philosophers, while inexorably denouncing
their philosophy.

Let us go on.

The remarkable thing about it is, also, their facility in paying
themselves off with words.  A metaphysical school of the North,
impregnated to some extent with fog, has fancied that it has worked
a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force
with the word Will.

To say:  "the plant wills," instead of:  "the plant grows":
this would be fecund in results, indeed, if we were to add: 
"the universe wills."  Why?  Because it would come to this: 
the plant wills, therefore it has an _I_; the universe wills,
therefore it has a God.

As for us, who, however, in contradistinction to this school,
reject nothing a priori, a will in the plant, accepted by this school,
appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe
denied by it.

To deny the will of the infinite, that is to say, God, is impossible
on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite.  We have
demonstrated this.

The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism. 
Everything becomes "a mental conception."

With nihilism, no discussion is possible; for the nihilist logic
doubts the existence of its interlocutor, and is not quite sure
that it exists itself.

From its point of view, it is possible that it may be for itself,
only "a mental conception."

Only, it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits
in the lump, simply by the utterance of the word, mind.

In short, no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes
all end in the monosyllable, No.

To No there is only one reply, Yes.

Nihilism has no point.

There is no such thing as nothingness.  Zero does not exist. 
Everything is something.  Nothing is nothing.

Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread.

Even to see and to show does not suffice.  Philosophy should be an energy;
it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition
of man.  Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius;
in other words, the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from
the man of felicity.  Eden should be changed into a Lyceum. 
Science should be a cordial.  To enjoy,--what a sad aim, and what a
paltry ambition!  The brute enjoys.  To offer thought to the thirst
of men, to give them all as an elixir the notion of God, to make
conscience and science fraternize in them, to render them just by this
mysterious confrontation; such is the function of real philosophy. 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths.  Contemplation leads to action. 
The absolute should be practicable.  It is necessary that the ideal
should be breathable, drinkable, and eatable to the human mind. 
It is the ideal which has the right to say:  Take, this
 is my body, this is my blood.  Wisdom is a holy communion. 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of
science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying,
and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion.

Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it
at its ease, without any other result than that of being convenient
to curiosity.

For our part, adjourning the development of our thought to
another occasion, we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither
understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end,
without those two forces which are their two motors:  faith and love.

Progress is the goal, the ideal is the type.

What is this ideal?  It is God.

Ideal, absolute, perfection, infinity:  identical words.



CHAPTER VII

PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME


History and philosophy have eternal duties, which are, at the
same time, simple duties; to combat Caiphas the High-priest, Draco
the Lawgiver, Trimalcion the Legislator, Tiberius the Emperor;
this is clear, direct, and limpid, and offers no obscurity.

But the right to live apart, even with its inconveniences and
its abuses, insists on being stated and taken into account. 
Cenobitism is a human problem.

When one speaks of convents, those abodes of error, but of innocence,
of aberration but of good-will, of ignorance but of devotion,
of torture but of martyrdom, it always becomes necessary to say
either yes or no.

A convent is a contradiction.  Its object,
salvation; its means thereto, sacrifice. 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation.

To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device
of monasticism.

In the cloister, one suffers in order to enjoy.  One draws a bill of
exchange on death.  One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light. 
In the cloister, hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise.

The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity.

It does not seem to us, that on such a subject mockery is permissible. 
All about it is serious, the good as well as the bad.

The just man frowns, but never smiles with a malicious sneer. 
We understand wrath, but not malice.



CHAPTER VIII

FAITH, LAW


A few words more.

We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues,
we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal;
but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man.

We salute the man who kneels.

A faith; this is a necessity for man.  Woe to him who believes nothing.

One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed.  There is visible
labor and invisible labor.

To contemplate is to labor, to think is to act.

Folded arms toil, clasped hands work.  A gaze fixed on heaven
is a work.

Thales remained motionless for four years.  He founded philosophy.

In our opinion, cenobites are not lazy men, and recluses are not idlers.

To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing.

Without invalidating anything that we have just said, we believe
that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living. 
On this point, the priest and the philosopher agree.  We must die. 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace.

To mingle with one's life a certain presence of the sepulchre,--
this is the law of the sage; and it is the law of the ascetic. 
In this respect, the ascetic and the sage converge.  There is a
material growth; we admit it.  There is a moral grandeur; we hold
to that.  Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say:--

"What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery? 
What purpose do they serve?  What do they do?"

Alas!  In the presence of the darkness which environs us,
and which awaits us, in our ignorance of what the immense
dispersion will make of us, we reply:  "There is probably no work
more divine than that performed by these souls."  And we add: 
"There is probably no work which is more useful."

There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who
never pray at all.

In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought
that is mingled with prayer.

Leibnitz praying is grand, Voltaire adoring is fine.  Deo erexit Voltaire.

We are for religion as against religions.

We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons,
and the sublimity of prayer.

Moreover, at this minute which we are now traversing,--a minute which
will not, fortunately, leave its impress on the nineteenth century,--
at this hour, when so many men have low brows and souls but little
elevated, among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment,
and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter,
whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us.

The monastery is a renunciation.  Sacrifice wrongly directed is
still sacrifice.  To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur
of its own.

Taken by itself, and ideally, and in order to examine the truth
on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted,
the monastery, the female convent in particular,--for in our
century it is woman who suffers the most, and in this exile
of the cloister there is something of protestation,--the female
convent has incontestably a certain majesty.

This cloistered existence which is so austere, so depressing,
a few of whose features we have just traced, is not life, for it
is not liberty; it is not the tomb, for it is not plenitude;
it is the strange place whence one beholds, as from the crest of a
lofty mountain, on one side the abyss where we are, on the other,
the abyss whither we shall go; it is the narrow and misty frontier
separating two worlds, illuminated and obscured by both at the
same time, where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled
with the vague ray of death; it is the half obscurity of the tomb.

We, who do not believe what these women believe, but who, like them,
live by faith,--we have never been able to think without a sort
of tender and religious terror, without a sort of pity, that is
full of envy, of those devoted, trembling and trusting creatures,
of these humble and august souls, who dare to dwell on the very brink
of the mystery, waiting between the world which is closed and heaven
which is not yet open, turned towards the light which one cannot see,
possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is,
aspiring towards the gulf, and the unknown, their eyes fixed motionless
on the darkness, kneeling, bewildered, stupefied, shuddering,
half lifted, at times, by the deep breaths of eternity.




BOOK EIGHTH.--CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM



CHAPTER I

WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT


It was into this house that Jean Valjean had, as Fauchelevent
expressed it, "fallen from the sky."

He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle
of the Rue Polonceau.  That hymn of the angels which he had heard
in the middle of the night, was the nuns chanting matins; that hall,
of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom, was the chapel. 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the
sister who was making reparation; that bell, the sound of which
had so strangely surprised him, was the gardener's bell attached
to the knee of Father Fauchelevent.

Cosette once put to bed, Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had, as we
have already seen, supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese
before a good, crackling fire; then, the only bed in the hut being
occupied by Cosette, each threw himself on a truss of straw.

Before he shut his eyes, Jean Valjean said:  "I must remain
here henceforth."  This remark trotted through Fauchelevent's
head all night long.

To tell the truth, neither of them slept.

Jean Valjean, feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on
his scent, understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned
to Paris.  Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded
him in this cloister.  Jean Valjean had, henceforth, but one thought,--
to remain there.  Now, for an unfortunate man in his position,
this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places;
the most dangerous, because, as no men might enter there, if he
were discovered, it was a flagrant offence, and Jean Valjean would
find but one step intervening between the convent and prison;
the safest, because, if he could manage to get himself accepted
there and remain there, who would ever seek him in such a place? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety.

On his side, Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains.  He began
by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter. 
How had M. Madeleine got there, when the walls were what they were? 
Cloister walls are not to be stepped over.  How did he get there
with a child?  One cannot scale a perpendicular wall with a child
in one's arms.  Who was that child?  Where did they both come from? 
Since Fauchelevent had lived in the convent, he had heard nothing
of M. sur M., and he knew nothing of what had taken place there. 
Father Madeleine had an air which discouraged questions; and besides,
Fauchelevent said to himself:  "One does not question a saint." 
M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in Fauchelevent's eyes. 
Only, from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall, the gardener
thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably become
bankrupt through the hard times, and that he was pursued by his creditors;
or that he had compromised himself in some political affair, and was
in hiding; which last did not displease Fauchelevent, who, like many
of our peasants of the North, had an old fund of Bonapartism about him. 
While in hiding, M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge,
and it was quite simple that he should wish to remain there. 
But the inexplicable point, to which Fauchelevent returned constantly
and over which he wearied his brain, was that M. Madeleine should
be there, and that he should have that little girl with him. 
Fauchelevent saw them, touched them, spoke to them, and still
did not believe it possible.  The incomprehensible had just made
its entrance into Fauchelevent's hut.  Fauchelevent groped
about amid conjectures, and could see nothing clearly but this: 
"M. Madeleine saved my life."  This certainty alone was sufficient
and decided his course.  He said to himself:  "It is my turn now." 
He added in his conscience:  "M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate
when it was a question of thrusting himself under the cart for
the purpose of dragging me out."  He made up his mind to save
M. Madeleine.

Nevertheless, he put many questions to himself and made himself
divers replies:  "After what he did for me, would I save him if he
were a thief?  Just the same.  If he were an assassin, would I
save him?  Just the same.  Since he is a saint, shall I save him? 
Just the same."

But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent! 
Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical
undertaking; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than
his self-devotion, his good will, and a little of that old rustic cunning,
on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous enterprise,
undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister, and the steep
escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoit. Father Fauchelevent was an old
man who had been an egoist all his life, and who, towards the end
of his days, halt, infirm, with no interest left to him in the world,
found it sweet to be grateful, and perceiving a generous action
to be performed, flung himself upon it like a man, who at the moment
when he is dying, should find close to his hand a glass of good wine
which he had never tasted, and should swallow it with avidity. 
We may add, that the air which he had breathed for many years
in this convent had destroyed all personality in him, and had
ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary to him.

So he took his resolve:  to devote himself to M. Madeleine.

We have just called him a poor peasant of Picardy.  That description
is just, but incomplete.  At the point of this story which we
have now reached, a little of Father Fauchelevent's physiology
becomes useful.  He was a peasant, but he had been a notary, which added
trickery to his cunning, and penetration to his ingenuousness. 
Having, through various causes, failed in his business, he had
descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer.  But, in spite
of oaths and lashings, which horses seem to require, something of
the notary had lingered in him.  He had some natural wit; he talked
good grammar; he conversed, which is a rare thing in a village;
and the other peasants said of him:  "He talks almost like a gentleman
with a hat."  Fauchelevent belonged, in fact, to that species,
which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century
qualified as demi-bourgeois, demi-lout, and which the metaphors showered
by the chateau upon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole
of the plebeian:  rather rustic, rather citified; pepper and salt. 
Fauchelevent, though sorely tried and harshly used by fate,
worn out, a sort of poor, threadbare old soul, was, nevertheless,
an impulsive man, and extremely spontaneous in his actions;
a precious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked. 
His defects and his vices, for he had some, were all superficial;
in short, his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with
an observer.  His aged face had none of those disagreeable
wrinkles at the top of the forehead, which signify malice or stupidity.

At daybreak, Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes, after having
done an enormous deal of thinking, and beheld M. Madeleine
seated on his truss of straw, and watching Cosette's slumbers. 
Fauchelevent sat up and said:--

"Now that you are here, how are you going to contrive to enter?"

This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from
his revery.

The two men took counsel together.

"In the first place,"' said Fauchelevent, "you will begin by not
setting foot outside of this chamber, either you or the child. 
One step in the garden and we are done for."

"That is true."

"Monsieur Madeleine," resumed Fauchelevent, "you have arrived at
a very auspicious moment, I mean to say a very inauspicious moment;
one of the ladies is very ill.  This will prevent them from looking
much in our direction.  It seems that she is dying.  The prayers of
the forty hours are being said.  The whole community is in confusion. 
That occupies them.  The one who is on the point of departure
is a saint.  In fact, we are all saints here; all the difference
between them and me is that they say `our cell,' and that I say
`my cabin.'  The prayers for the dying are to be said, and then
the prayers for the dead.  We shall be at peace here for to-day;
but I will not answer for to-morrow."

"Still," observed Jean Valjean, "this cottage is in the niche
of the wall, it is hidden by a sort of ruin, there are trees,
it is not visible from the convent."

"And I add that the nuns never come near it."

"Well?" said Jean Valjean.

The interrogation mark which accentuated this "well" signified: 
"it seems to me that one may remain concealed here?"  It was to this
interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded:--

"There are the little girls."

"What little girls?" asked Jean Valjean.

Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he
had uttered, a bell emitted one stroke.

"The nun is dead," said he.  "There is the knell."

And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen.

The bell struck a second time.

"It is the knell, Monsieur Madeleine.  The bell will continue
to strike once a minute for twenty-four hours, until the body is
taken from the church.--You see, they play.  At recreation hours
it suffices to have a ball roll aside, to send them all hither,
in spite of prohibitions, to hunt and rummage for it all about here. 
Those cherubs are devils."

"Who?" asked Jean Valjean.

"The little girls.  You would be very quickly discovered. 
They would shriek:  `Oh! a man!'  There is no danger to-day. There
will be no recreation hour.  The day will be entirely devoted
to prayers.  You hear the bell.  As I told you, a stroke each minute. 
It is the death knell."

"I understand, Father Fauchelevent.  There are pupils."

And Jean Valjean thought to himself:--

"Here is Cosette's education already provided."

Fauchelevent exclaimed:--

"Pardine!  There are little girls indeed!  And they would bawl
around you!  And they would rush off!  To be a man here is to have
the plague.  You see how they fasten a bell to my paw as though
I were a wild beast."

Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought.--"This convent
would be our salvation," he murmured.

Then he raised his voice:--

"Yes, the difficulty is to remain here."

"No," said Fauchelevent, "the difficulty is to get out."

Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart.

"To get out!"

"Yes, Monsieur Madeleine.  In order to return here it is first
necessary to get out."

And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded,
Fauchelevent went on:--

"You must not be found here in this fashion.  Whence come you? 
For me, you fall from heaven, because I know you; but the nuns require
one to enter by the door."

All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell.

"Ah!" said Fauchelevent, "they are ringing up the vocal mothers. 
They are going to the chapter.  They always hold a chapter when any
one dies.  She died at daybreak.  People generally do die at daybreak. 
But cannot you get out by the way in which you entered?  Come, I do
not ask for the sake of questioning you, but how did you get in?"

Jean Valjean turned pale; the very thought of descending again
into that terrible street made him shudder.  You make your
way out of a forest filled with tigers, and once out of it,
imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still
engaged in swarming in that quarter, agents on the watch,
sentinels everywhere, frightful fists extended towards his collar,
Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps.

"Impossible!" said he.  "Father Fauchelevent, say that I fell
from the sky."

"But I believe it, I believe it," retorted Fauchelevent. 
"You have no need to tell me that.  The good God must have taken you
in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to,
and then dropped you.  Only, he meant to place you in a man's convent;
he made a mistake.  Come, there goes another peal, that is to order
the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is
to come here and view a corpse.  All that is the ceremony of dying. 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit.  A doctor
is a man who does not believe in anything.  He lifts the veil. 
Sometimes he lifts something else too.  How quickly they have had
the doctor summoned this time!  What is the matter?  Your little
one is still asleep.  What is her name?"

"Cosette."

"She is your daughter?

You are her grandfather, that is?"

"Yes."

"It will be easy enough for her to get out of here.  I have my service
door which opens on the courtyard.  I knock.  The porter opens;
I have my vintage basket on my back, the child is in it, I go out. 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket--that is perfectly natural. 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet.  She will be under the cover. 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend,
a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert, who is deaf,
and who has a little bed.  I will shout in the fruit-seller's ear,
that she is a niece of mine, and that she is to keep her for me
until to-morrow. Then the little one will re-enter with you;
for I will contrive to have you re-enter. It must be done. 
But how will you manage to get out?"

Jean Valjean shook his head.

"No one must see me, the whole point lies there, Father Fauchelevent. 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket, under cover,
like Cosette."

Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger
of his left hand, a sign of serious embarrassment.

A third peal created a diversion.

"That is the dead-doctor taking his departure," said Fauchelevent. 
"He has taken a look and said:  `She is dead, that is well.' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise, the undertaker's
company sends a coffin.  If it is a mother, the mothers lay her out;
if she is a sister, the sisters lay her out.  After which, I nail
her up.  That forms a part of my gardener's duty.  A gardener is
a bit of a grave-digger. She is placed in a lower hall of the church
which communicates with the street, and into which no man may enter
save the doctor of the dead.  I don't count the undertaker's men
and myself as men.  It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin. 
The undertaker's men come and get it, and whip up, coachman! that's
the way one goes to heaven.  They fetch a box with nothing in it,
they take it away again with something in it.  That's what a burial
is like.  De profundis."

A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of
the sleeping Cosette, who lay with her mouth vaguely open,
and had the air of an angel drinking in the light.  Jean Valjean
had fallen to gazing at her.  He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent.

That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence. 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble:--

"The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery.  They declare that they
are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery.  It is an ancient
cemetery which is outside the regulations, which has no uniform,
and which is going to retire.  It is a shame, for it is convenient. 
I have a friend there, Father Mestienne, the grave-digger. The nuns
here possess one privilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery
at nightfall.  There is a special permission from the Prefecture on
their behalf.  But how many events have happened since yesterday! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead, and Father Madeleine--"

"Is buried," said Jean Valjean, smiling sadly.

Fauchelevent caught the word.

"Goodness! if you were here for good, it would be a real burial."

A fourth peal burst out.  Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled
knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again.

"This time it is for me.  The Mother Prioress wants me.  Good, now I
am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle.  Monsieur Madeleine,
don't stir from here, and wait for me.  Something new has come up. 
If you are hungry, there is wine, bread and cheese."

And he hastened out of the hut, crying:  "Coming! coming!"

Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his
crooked leg would permit, casting a sidelong glance by the way
on his melon patch.

Less than ten minutes later, Father Fauchelevent, whose bell put
the nuns in his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle
voice replied:  "Forever!  Forever!" that is to say:  "Enter."

The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing
the gardener on business.  This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. 
The prioress, seated on the only chair in the parlor, was waiting
for Fauchelevent.



CHAPTER II

FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY


It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions,
notably priests and nuns, to wear a grave and agitated air on
critical occasions.  At the moment when Fauchelevent entered,
this double form of preoccupation was imprinted on the countenance
of the prioress, who was that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur,
Mother Innocente, who was ordinarily cheerful.

The gardener made a timid bow, and remained at the door of the cell. 
The prioress, who was telling her beads, raised her eyes and said:--

"Ah! it is you, Father Fauvent."

This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent.

Fauchelevent bowed again.

"Father Fauvent, I have sent for you."

"Here I am, reverend Mother."

"I have something to say to you."

"And so have I," said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him
inward terror, "I have something to say to the very reverend Mother."

The prioress stared at him.

"Ah! you have a communication to make to me."

"A request."

"Very well, speak."

Goodman Fauchelevent, the ex-notary, belonged to the category of
peasants who have assurance.  A certain clever ignorance constitutes
a force; you do not distrust it, and you are caught by it. 
Fauchelevent had been a success during the something more than two
years which he had passed in the convent.  Always solitary and busied
about his gardening, he had nothing else to do than to indulge
his curiosity.  As he was at a distance from all those veiled women
passing to and fro, he saw before him only an agitation of shadows. 
By dint of attention and sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all
those phantoms with flesh, and those corpses were alive for him. 
He was like a deaf man whose sight grows keener, and like a blind man
whose hearing becomes more acute.  He had applied himself to riddling
out the significance of the different peals, and he had succeeded,
so that this taciturn and enigmatical cloister possessed no
secrets for him; the sphinx babbled all her secrets in his ear. 
Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all; that constituted his art. 
The whole convent thought him stupid.  A great merit in religion. 
The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent.  He was a curious mute. 
He inspired confidence.  Moreover, he was regular, and never went
out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchard and
vegetable garden.  This discretion of conduct had inured to his credit. 
None the less, he had set two men to chattering:  the porter,
in the convent, and he knew the singularities of their parlor,
and the grave-digger, at the cemetery, and he was acquainted with
the peculiarities of their sepulture; in this way, he possessed
a double light on the subject of these nuns, one as to their life,
the other as to their death.  But he did not abuse his knowledge. 
The congregation thought a great deal of him.  Old, lame, blind to
everything, probably a little deaf into the bargain,--what qualities! 
They would have found it difficult to replace him.

The goodman, with the assurance of a person who feels that he
is appreciated, entered into a rather diffuse and very deep
rustic harangue to the reverend prioress.  He talked a long time
about his age, his infirmities, the surcharge of years counting
double for him henceforth, of the increasing demands of his work,
of the great size of the garden, of nights which must be passed,
like the last, for instance, when he had been obliged to put straw mats
over the melon beds, because of the moon, and he wound up as follows: 
"That he had a brother"--(the prioress made a movement),--"a brother
no longer young"--(a second movement on the part of the prioress,
but one expressive of reassurance),--"that, if he might be permitted,
this brother would come and live with him and help him, that he
was an excellent gardener, that the community would receive from him
good service, better than his own; that, otherwise, if his brother
were not admitted, as he, the elder, felt that his health was broken
and that he was insufficient for the work, he should be obliged,
greatly to his regret, to go away; and that his brother had a little
daughter whom he would bring with him, who might be reared for God
in the house, and who might, who knows, become a nun some day."

When he had finished speaking, the prioress stayed the slipping
of her rosary between her fingers, and said to him:--

"Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening?"

"For what purpose?"

"To serve as a lever."

"Yes, reverend Mother," replied Fauchelevent.

The prioress, without adding a word, rose and entered the adjoining room,
which was the hall of the chapter, and where the vocal mothers
were probably assembled.  Fauchelevent was left alone.



CHAPTER III

MOTHER INNOCENTE


About a quarter of an hour elapsed.  The prioress returned
and seated herself once more on her chair.

The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied.  We will present a stenographic
report of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best of our ability.

"Father Fauvent!"

"Reverend Mother!"

"Do you know the chapel?"

"I have a little cage there, where I hear the mass and the offices."

"And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties?"

"Two or three times."

"There is a stone to be raised."

"Heavy?"

"The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar."

"The slab which closes the vault?"

"Yes."

"It would be a good thing to have two men for it."

"Mother Ascension, who is as strong as a man, will help you."

"A woman is never a man."

"We have only a woman here to help you.  Each one does what he can. 
Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles
of Saint Bernard, while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred
and sixty-seven, I do not despise Merlonus Horstius."

"Neither do I."

"Merit consists in working according to one's strength.  A cloister
is not a dock-yard."

"And a woman is not a man.  But my brother is the strong one, though!"

"And can you get a lever?"

"That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door."

"There is a ring in the stone."

"I will put the lever through it."

"And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot."

"That is good, reverend Mother.  I will open the vault."

"And the four Mother Precentors will help you."

"And when the vault is open?"

"It must be closed again."

"Will that be all?"

"No."

"Give me your orders, very reverend Mother."

"Fauvent, we have confidence in you."

"I am here to do anything you wish."

"And to hold your peace about everything!"

"Yes, reverend Mother."

"When the vault is open--"

"I will close it again."

"But before that--"

"What, reverend Mother?"

"Something must be lowered into it."

A silence ensued.  The prioress, after a pout of the under lip
which resembled hesitation, broke it.

"Father Fauvent!"

"Reverend Mother!"

"You know that a mother died this morning?"

"No."

"Did you not hear the bell?"

"Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden."

"Really?"

"I can hardly distinguish my own signal."

"She died at daybreak."

"And then, the wind is not blowing in my direction this morning."

"It was Mother Crucifixion.  A blessed woman."

The prioress paused, moved her lips, as though in mental prayer,
and resumed:--

"Three years ago, Madame de Bethune, a Jansenist, turned orthodox,
merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer."

"Ah! yes, now I hear the knell, reverend Mother."

"The mothers have taken her to the dead-room, which opens on the church."

"I know."

"No other man than you can or must enter that chamber.  See to that. 
A fine sight it would be, to see a man enter the dead-room!"

"More often!"

"Hey?"

"More often!"

"What do you say?"

"I say more often."

"More often than what?"

"Reverend Mother, I did not say more often than what, I said
more often."

"I don't understand you.  Why do you say more often?"

"In order to speak like you, reverend Mother."

"But I did not say `more often.'"

At that moment, nine o'clock struck.

"At nine o'clock in the morning and at all hours, praised and adored
be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar," said the prioress.

"Amen," said Fauchelevent.

The clock struck opportunely.  It cut "more often" short. 
It is probable, that had it not been for this, the prioress
and Fauchelevent would never have unravelled that skein.

Fauchelevent mopped his forehead.

The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur, probably sacred,
then raised her voice:--

"In her lifetime, Mother Crucifixion made converts; after her death,
she will perform miracles."

"She will!" replied Father Fauchelevent, falling into step,
and striving not to flinch again.

"Father Fauvent, the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion. 
No doubt, it is not granted to every one to die, like Cardinal
de Berulle, while saying the holy mass, and to breathe forth their
souls to God, while pronouncing these words:  Hanc igitur oblationem. 
But without attaining to such happiness, Mother Crucifixion's
death was very precious.  She retained her consciousness to the
very last moment.  She spoke to us, then she spoke to the angels. 
She gave us her last commands.  If you had a little more faith,
and if you could have been in her cell, she would have cured your leg
merely by touching it.  She smiled.  We felt that she was regaining
her life in God.  There was something of paradise in that death."

Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing.

"Amen," said he.

"Father Fauvent, what the dead wish must be done."

The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet.  Fauchelevent held
his peace.

She went on:--

"I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in
Our Lord, who occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life,
and who bear wonderful fruit."

"Reverend Mother, you can hear the knell much better here than
in the garden."

"Besides, she is more than a dead woman, she is a saint."

"Like yourself, reverend Mother."

"She slept in her coffin for twenty years, by express permission
of our Holy Father, Pius VII.--"

"The one who crowned the Emp--Buonaparte."

For a clever man like Fauchelevent, this allusion was an awkward one. 
Fortunately, the prioress, completely absorbed in her own thoughts,
did not hear it.  She continued:--

"Father Fauvent?"

"Reverend Mother?"

"Saint Didorus, Archbishop of Cappadocia, desired that this single
word might be inscribed on his tomb:  Acarus, which signifies,
a worm of the earth; this was done.  Is this true?"

"Yes, reverend Mother."

"The blessed Mezzocane, Abbot of Aquila, wished to be buried beneath
the gallows; this was done."

"That is true."

"Saint Terentius, Bishop of Port, where the mouth of the Tiber
empties into the sea, requested that on his tomb might be engraved
the sign which was placed on the graves of parricides, in the
hope that passers-by would spit on his tomb.  This was done. 
The dead must be obeyed."

"So be it."

"The body of Bernard Guidonis, born in France near Roche-Abeille, was,
as he had ordered, and in spite of the king of Castile, borne to
the church of the Dominicans in Limoges, although Bernard Guidonis
was Bishop of Tuy in Spain.  Can the contrary be affirmed?"

"For that matter, no, reverend Mother."

"The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse."

Several beads of the chaplet were told off, still in silence. 
The prioress resumed:--

"Father Fauvent, Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin
in which she has slept for the last twenty years."

"That is just."

"It is a continuation of her slumber."

"So I shall have to nail up that coffin?"

"Yes."

"And we are to reject the undertaker's coffin?"

"Precisely."

"I am at the orders of the very reverend community."

"The four Mother Precentors will assist you."

"In nailing up the coffin?  I do not need them."

"No. In lowering the coffin."

"Where?"

"Into the vault."

"What vault?"

"Under the altar."

Fauchelevent started.

"The vault under the altar?"

"Under the altar."

"But--"

"You will have an iron bar."

"Yes, but--"

"You will raise the stone with the bar by means of the ring."

"But--"

"The dead must be obeyed.  To be buried in the vault under the
altar of the chapel, not to go to profane earth; to remain there
in death where she prayed while living; such was the last wish
of Mother Crucifixion.  She asked it of us; that is to say, commanded us."

"But it is forbidden."

"Forbidden by men, enjoined by God."

"What if it became known?"

"We have confidence in you."

"Oh!  I am a stone in your walls."

"The chapter assembled.  The vocal mothers, whom I have just
consulted again, and who are now deliberating, have decided
that Mother Crucifixion shall be buried, according to her wish,
in her own coffin, under our altar.  Think, Father Fauvent, if she
were to work miracles here!  What a glory of God for the community! 
And miracles issue from tombs."

"But, reverend Mother, if the agent of the sanitary commission--"

"Saint Benoit II., in the matter of sepulture, resisted
Constantine Pogonatus."

"But the commissary of police--"

"Chonodemaire, one of the seven German kings who entered among
the Gauls under the Empire of Constantius, expressly recognized
the right of nuns to be buried in religion, that is to say,
beneath the altar."

"But the inspector from the Prefecture--"

"The world is nothing in the presence of the cross.  Martin, the
eleventh general of the Carthusians, gave to his order this device: 
Stat crux dum volvitur orbis."

"Amen," said Fauchelevent, who imperturbably extricated himself
in this manner from the dilemma, whenever he heard Latin.

Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long. 
On the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison,
bearing in his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had
struck in, he halted in front of the first tree which he came to,
harangued it and made very great efforts to convince it.  The prioress,
who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence, and whose
reservoir was overfull, rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam
which has broken away:--

"I have on my right Benoit and on my left Bernard.  Who was Bernard? 
The first abbot of Clairvaux.  Fontaines in Burgundy is a country
that is blest because it gave him birth.  His father was named Tecelin,
and his mother Alethe.  He began at Citeaux, to end in Clairvaux;
he was ordained abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone, Guillaume
de Champeaux; he had seven hundred novices, and founded a hundred
and sixty monasteries; he overthrew Abeilard at the council
of Sens in 1140, and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple,
and another sort of erring spirits who were called the Apostolics;
he confounded Arnauld de Brescia, darted lightning at the monk Raoul,
the murderer of the Jews, dominated the council of Reims in 1148,
caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Porea, Bishop of Poitiers,
caused the condemnation of Eon de l'Etoile, arranged the disputes
of princes, enlightened King Louis the Young, advised Pope Eugene III.,
regulated the Temple, preached the crusade, performed two hundred
and fifty miracles during his lifetime, and as many as thirty-nine
in one day.  Who was Benoit?  He was the patriarch of Mont-Cassin;
he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale, he was the Basil
of the West.  His order has produced forty popes, two hundred cardinals,
fifty patriarchs, sixteen hundred archbishops, four thousand six
hundred bishops, four emperors, twelve empresses, forty-six kings,
forty-one queens, three thousand six hundred canonized saints,
and has been in existence for fourteen hundred years.  On one side
Saint Bernard, on the other the agent of the sanitary department! 
On one side Saint Benoit, on the other the inspector of public ways! 
The state, the road commissioners, the public undertaker,
regulations, the administration, what do we know of all that? 
There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see
how we are treated.  We have not even the right to give our dust to
Jesus Christ!  Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention. 
God subordinated to the commissary of police; such is the age. 
Silence, Fauvent!"

Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath. 
The prioress continued:--

"No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture.  Only fanatics
and those in error deny it.  We live in times of terrible confusion. 
We do not know that which it is necessary to know, and we know that
which we should ignore.  We are ignorant and impious.  In this age
there exist people who do not distinguish between the very great Saint
Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics,
a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century. 
Others are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI. 
to the cross of Jesus Christ.  Louis XVI.  was merely a king. 
Let us beware of God!  There is no longer just nor unjust. 
The name of Voltaire is known, but not the name of Cesar de Bus. 
Nevertheless, Cesar de Bus is a man of blessed memory, and Voltaire one
of unblessed memory.  The last arch-bishop, the Cardinal de Perigord,
did not even know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle,
and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren, and Jean-Francois Senault
to Bourgoin, and Father Sainte-Marthe to Jean-Francois Senault. 
The name of Father Coton is known, not because he was one of the three
who urged the foundation of the Oratorie, but because he furnished
Henri IV., the Huguenot king, with the material for an oath. 
That which pleases people of the world in Saint Francois de Sales,
is that he cheated at play.  And then, religion is attacked. 
Why?  Because there have been bad priests, because Sagittaire,
Bishop of Gap, was the brother of Salone, Bishop of Embrun,
and because both of them followed Mommol.  What has that to do
with the question?  Does that prevent Martin de Tours from being
a saint, and giving half of his cloak to a beggar?  They persecute
the saints.  They shut their eyes to the truth.  Darkness is
the rule.  The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind. 
No one thinks of hell as a reality.  Oh! how wicked people are! 
By order of the king signifies to-day, by order of the revolution. 
One no longer knows what is due to the living or to the dead.  A holy
death is prohibited.  Burial is a civil matter.  This is horrible. 
Saint Leo II.  wrote two special letters, one to Pierre Notaire,
the other to the king of the Visigoths, for the purpose of combating
and rejecting, in questions touching the dead, the authority of the
exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor.  Gauthier, Bishop of Chalons,
held his own in this matter against Otho, Duke of Burgundy. 
The ancient magistracy agreed with him.  In former times we had voices
in the chapter, even on matters of the day.  The Abbot of Citeaux,
the general of the order, was councillor by right of birth to the
parliament of Burgundy.  We do what we please with our dead. 
Is not the body of Saint Benoit himself in France, in the abbey
of Fleury, called Saint Benoit-sur-Loire, although he died in Italy
at Mont-Cassin, on Saturday, the 21st of the month of March,
of the year 543?  All this is incontestable.  I abhor psalm-singers,
I hate priors, I execrate heretics, but I should detest yet more
any one who should maintain the contrary.  One has only to read
Arnoul Wion, Gabriel Bucelin, Trithemus, Maurolics, and Dom Luc
d'Achery."

The prioress took breath, then turned to Fauchelevent.

"Is it settled, Father Fauvent?"

"It is settled, reverend Mother."

"We may depend on you?"

"I will obey."

"That is well."

"I am entirely devoted to the convent."

"That is understood.  You will close the coffin.  The sisters will
carry it to the chapel.  The office for the dead will then be said. 
Then we shall return to the cloister.  Between eleven o'clock
and midnight, you will come with your iron bar.  All will be done
in the most profound secrecy.  There will be in the chapel only
the four Mother Precentors, Mother Ascension and yourself."

"And the sister at the post?"

"She will not turn round."

"But she will hear."

"She will not listen.  Besides, what the cloister knows the world
learns not."

A pause ensued.  The prioress went on:--

"You will remove your bell.  It is not necessary that the sister
at the post should perceive your presence."

"Reverend Mother?"

"What, Father Fauvent?"

"Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit?"

"He will pay it at four o'clock to-day. The peal which orders
the doctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung. 
But you do not understand any of the peals?"

"I pay no attention to any but my own."

"That is well, Father Fauvent."

"Reverend Mother, a lever at least six feet long will be required."

"Where will you obtain it?"

"Where gratings are not lacking, iron bars are not lacking. 
I have my heap of old iron at the bottom of the garden."

"About three-quarters of an hour before midnight; do not forget."

"Reverend Mother?"

"What?"

"If you were ever to have any other jobs of this sort, my brother
is the strong man for you.  A perfect Turk!"

"You will do it as speedily as possible."

"I cannot work very fast.  I am infirm; that is why I require
an assistant.  I limp."

"To limp is no sin, and perhaps it is a blessing.  The Emperor
Henry II., who combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoit
VIII., has two surnames, the Saint and the Lame."

"Two surtouts are a good thing," murmured Fauchelevent, who really
was a little hard of hearing.

"Now that I think of it, Father Fauvent, let us give a whole
hour to it.  That is not too much.  Be near the principal altar,
with your iron bar, at eleven o'clock. The office begins at midnight. 
Everything must have been completed a good quarter of an hour
before that."

"I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community. 
These are my orders.  I am to nail up the coffin.  At eleven
o'clock exactly, I am to be in the chapel.  The Mother Precentors
will be there.  Mother Ascension will be there.  Two men would
be better.  However, never mind!  I shall have my lever. 
We will open the vault, we will lower the coffin, and we will close
the vault again.  After which, there will be no trace of anything. 
The government will have no suspicion.  Thus all has been arranged,
reverend Mother?"

"No!"

"What else remains?"

"The empty coffin remains."

This produced a pause.  Fauchelevent meditated.  The prioress meditated.

"What is to be done with that coffin, Father Fauvent?"

"It will be given to the earth."

"Empty?"

Another silence.  Fauchelevent made, with his left hand, that sort
of a gesture which dismisses a troublesome subject.

"Reverend Mother, I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in the
basement of the church, and no one can enter there but myself,
and I will cover the coffin with the pall."

"Yes, but the bearers, when they place it in the hearse and lower it
into the grave, will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it."

"Ah! the de--!" exclaimed Fauchelevent.

The prioress began to make the sign of the cross, and looked fixedly
at the gardener.  The vil stuck fast in his throat.

He made haste to improvise an expedient to make her forget the oath.

"I will put earth in the coffin, reverend Mother.  That will produce
the effect of a corpse."

"You are right.  Earth, that is the same thing as man.  So you
will manage the empty coffin?"

"I will make that my special business."

The prioress's face, up to that moment troubled and clouded,
grew serene once more.  She made the sign of a superior dismissing
an inferior to him.  Fauchelevent went towards the door.  As he was
on the point of passing out, the prioress raised her voice gently:--

"I am pleased with you, Father Fauvent; bring your brother to me
to-morrow, after the burial, and tell him to fetch his daughter."



CHAPTER IV

IN WHICH JEAN VALJEAN HAS QUITE THE AIR OF HAVING READ AUSTIN
CASTILLEJO


The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyed man;
they do not reach their goal very promptly.  Moreover, Fauchelevent was
in a dilemma.  He took nearly a quarter of an hour to return to his
cottage in the garden.  Cosette had waked up.  Jean Valjean had
placed her near the fire.  At the moment when Fauchelevent entered,
Jean Valjean was pointing out to her the vintner's basket on the wall,
and saying to her, "Listen attentively to me, my little Cosette. 
We must go away from this house, but we shall return to it, and we shall
be very happy here.  The good man who lives here is going to carry you
off on his back in that.  You will wait for me at a lady's house. 
I shall come to fetch you.  Obey, and say nothing, above all things,
unless you want Madame Thenardier to get you again!"

Cosette nodded gravely.

Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening
the door.

"Well?"

"Everything is arranged, and nothing is," said Fauchelevent. 
"I have permission to bring you in; but before bringing you in you
must be got out.  That's where the difficulty lies.  It is easy
enough with the child."

"You will carry her out?"

"And she will hold her tongue?"

"I answer for that."

"But you, Father Madeleine?"

And, after a silence, fraught with anxiety, Fauchelevent exclaimed:--

"Why, get out as you came in!"

Jean Valjean, as in the first instance, contented himself
with saying, "Impossible."

Fauchelevent grumbled, more to himself than to Jean Valjean:--

"There is another thing which bothers me.  I have said that I would
put earth in it.  When I come to think it over, the earth instead
of the corpse will not seem like the real thing, it won't do,
it will get displaced, it will move about.  The men will bear it. 
You understand, Father Madeleine, the government will notice it."

Jean Valjean stared him straight in the eye and thought that he
was raving.

Fauchelevent went on:--

"How the de--uce are you going to get out?  It must all be done
by to-morrow morning.  It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in. 
The prioress expects you."

Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for
a service which he, Fauchelevent, was to render to the community. 
That it fell among his duties to take part in their burials, that he
nailed up the coffins and helped the grave-digger at the cemetery. 
That the nun who had died that morning had requested to be buried
in the coffin which had served her for a bed, and interred in the vault
under the altar of the chapel.  That the police regulations forbade this,
but that she was one of those dead to whom nothing is refused. 
That the prioress and the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish
of the deceased.  That it was so much the worse for the government. 
That he, Fauchelevent, was to nail up the coffin in the cell,
raise the stone in the chapel, and lower the corpse into the vault. 
And that, by way of thanks, the prioress was to admit his brother
to the house as a gardener, and his niece as a pupil.  That his brother
was M. Madeleine, and that his niece was Cosette.  That the prioress
had told him to bring his brother on the following evening, after the
counterfeit interment in the cemetery.  But that he could not bring
M. Madeleine in from the outside if M. Madeleine was not outside. 
That that was the first problem.  And then, that there was another: 
the empty coffin."

"What is that empty coffin?" asked Jean Valjean.

Fauchelevent replied:--

"The coffin of the administration."

"What coffin?  What administration?"

"A nun dies.  The municipal doctor comes and says, `A nun has died.' 
The government sends a coffin.  The next day it sends a hearse and
undertaker's men to get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery. 
The undertaker's men will come and lift the coffin; there will be
nothing in it."

"Put something in it."

"A corpse?  I have none."

"No."

"What then?"

"A living person."

"What person?"

"Me!" said Jean Valjean.

Fauchelevent, who was seated, sprang up as though a bomb had burst
under his chair.

"You!"

"Why not?"

Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up
his face like a flash from heaven in the winter.

"You know, Fauchelevent, what you have said:  `Mother Crucifixion
is dead.'  and I add:  `and Father Madeleine is buried.'

"Ah! good, you can laugh, you are not speaking seriously."

"Very seriously, I must get out of this place."

"Certainly."

"l have told you to find a basket, and a cover for me also,"

"Well?"

"The basket will be of pine, and the cover a black cloth."

"In the first place, it will be a white cloth.  Nuns are buried
in white."

"Let it be a white cloth, then."

"You are not like other men, Father Madeleine."

To behold such devices, which are nothing else than the savage and daring
inventions of the galleys, spring forth from the peaceable things
which surrounded him, and mingle with what he called the "petty course
of life in the convent," caused Fauchelevent as much amazement as a gull
fishing in the gutter of the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire in a passer-by.

Jean Valjean went on:--

"The problem is to get out of here without being seen.  This offers
the means.  But give me some information, in the first place. 
How is it managed?  Where is this coffin?"

"The empty one?"

"Yes."

"Down stairs, in what is called the dead-room. It stands
on two trestles, under the pall."

"How long is the coffin?"

"Six feet."

"What is this dead-room?"

"It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window
opening on the garden, which is closed on the outside by a shutter,
and two doors; one leads into the convent, the other into the church."

"What church?"

"The church in the street, the church which any one can enter."

"Have you the keys to those two doors?"

"No; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent;
the porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church."

"When does the porter open that door?"

"Only to allow the undertaker's men to enter, when they come
to get the coffin.  When the coffin has been taken out, the door
is closed again."

"Who nails up the coffin?"

"I do."

"Who spreads the pall over it?"

"I do."

"Are you alone?"

"Not another man, except the police doctor, can enter the dead-room.
That is even written on the wall."

"Could you hide me in that room to-night when every one is asleep?"

"No. But I could hide you in a small, dark nook which opens
on the dead-room, where I keep my tools to use for burials,
and of which I have the key."

"At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow?"

"About three o'clock in the afternoon.  The burial will take
place at the Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall. 
It is not very near."

"I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all
the morning.  And how about food?  I shall be hungry."

"I will bring you something."

"You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o'clock."

Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints.

"But that is impossible!"

"Bah!  Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank?"

What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was, we repeat,
a simple matter to Jean Valjean.  Jean Valjean had been in worse
straits than this.  Any man who has been a prisoner understands
how to contract himself to fit the diameter of the escape. 
The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject
to a crisis which saves or kills him.  An escape is a cure. 
What does not a man undergo for the sake of a cure?  To have
himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale of goods,
to live for a long time in a box, to find air where there is none,
to economize his breath for hours, to know how to stifle without dying--
this was one of Jean Valjean's gloomy talents.

Moreover, a coffin containing a living being,--that convict's expedient,--
is also an imperial expedient.  If we are to credit the monk
Austin Castillejo, this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth,
desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication.

He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery
of Saint-Yuste in this manner.

Fauchelevent, who had recovered himself a little, exclaimed:--

"But how will you manage to breathe?"

"I will breathe."

"In that box!  The mere thought of it suffocates me."

"You surely must have a gimlet, you will make a few holes here and there,
around my mouth, and you will nail the top plank on loosely."

"Good!  And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze?"

"A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze."

And Jean Valjean added:--

"Father Fauchelevent, we must come to a decision:  I must either
be caught here, or accept this escape through the hearse."

Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing
and lounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door.  Who is
there who has not said to a cat, "Do come in!"  There are men who,
when an incident stands half-open before them, have the same tendency
to halt in indecision between two resolutions, at the risk of getting
crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate. 
The over-prudent, cats as they are, and because they are cats,
sometimes incur more danger than the audacious.  Fauchelevent was
of this hesitating nature.  But Jean Valjean's coolness prevailed
over him in spite of himself.  He grumbled:--

"Well, since there is no other means."

Jean Valjean resumed:--

"The only thing which troubles me is what will take place
at the cemetery."

"That is the very point that is not troublesome," exclaimed Fauchelevent. 
"If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right, I am sure
of getting you out of the grave.  The grave-digger is a drunkard,
and a friend of mine.  He is Father Mestienne.  An old fellow
of the old school.  The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave,
and I put the grave-digger in my pocket.  I will tell you
what will take place.  They will arrive a little before dusk,
three-quarters of an hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed. 
The hearse will drive directly up to the grave.  I shall follow;
that is my business.  I shall have a hammer, a chisel, and some
pincers in my pocket.  The hearse halts, the undertaker's men knot
a rope around your coffin and lower you down.  The priest says
the prayers, makes the sign of the cross, sprinkles the holy water,
and takes his departure.  I am left alone with Father Mestienne. 
He is my friend, I tell you.  One of two things will happen,
he will either be sober, or he will not be sober.  If he is not drunk,
I shall say to him:  `Come and drink a bout while the Bon Coing
[the Good Quince] is open.'  I carry him off, I get him drunk,--
it does not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk, he always
has the beginning of it about him,--I lay him under the table,
I take his card, so that I can get into the cemetery again,
and I return without him.  Then you have no longer any one but me
to deal with.  If he is drunk, I shall say to him:  `Be off;
I will do your work for you.'  Off he goes, and I drag you out of
the hole."

Jean Valjean held out his hand, and Fauchelevent precipitated
himself upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant.

"That is settled, Father Fauchelevent.  All will go well."

"Provided nothing goes wrong," thought Fauchelevent.  "In that case,
it would be terrible."



CHAPTER V


IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE IMMORTAL


On the following day, as the sun was declining, the very rare
passers-by on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an
old-fashioned hearse, ornamented with skulls, cross-bones, and tears. 
This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which
spread a large black cross, like a huge corpse with drooping arms. 
A mourning-coach, in which could be seen a priest in his surplice,
and a choir boy in his red cap, followed.  Two undertaker's men
in gray uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left
of the hearse.  Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer,
who limped along.  The procession was going in the direction
of the Vaugirard cemetery.

The handle of a hammer, the blade of a cold chisel, and the antennae
of a pair of pincers were visible, protruding from the man's pocket.

The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries
of Paris.  It had its peculiar usages, just as it had its carriage
entrance and its house door, which old people in the quarter,
who clung tenaciously to ancient words, still called the porte cavaliere
and the porte pietonne.[16] The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue
Petit-Picpus had obtained permission, as we have already stated,
to be buried there in a corner apart, and at night, the plot of land
having formerly belonged to their community.  The grave-diggers being
thus bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter,
in this cemetery, they were subjected to a special discipline. 
The gates of the Paris cemeteries closed, at that epoch, at sundown,
and this being a municipal regulation, the Vaugirard cemetery
was bound by it like the rest.  The carriage gate and the house
door were two contiguous grated gates, adjoining a pavilion built
by the architect Perronet, and inhabited by the door-keeper of
the cemetery.  These gates, therefore, swung inexorably on their
hinges at the instant when the sun disappeared behind the dome
of the Invalides.  If any grave-digger were delayed after that
moment in the cemetery, there was but one way for him to get out--
his grave-digger's card furnished by the department of public funerals. 
A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter's window. 
The grave-digger dropped his card into this box, the porter heard
it fall, pulled the rope, and the small door opened.  If the man
had not his card, he mentioned his name, the porter, who was
sometimes in bed and asleep, rose, came out and identified the man,
and opened the gate with his key; the grave-digger stepped out,
but had to pay a fine of fifteen francs.


[16] Instead of porte cochere and porte batarde.


This cemetery, with its peculiarities outside the regulations,
embarrassed the symmetry of the administration.  It was suppressed
a little later than 1830.  The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse, called
the Eastern cemetery, succeeded to it, and inherited that famous
dram-shop next to the Vaugirard cemetery, which was surmounted
by a quince painted on a board, and which formed an angle, one side
on the drinkers' tables, and the other on the tombs, with this sign: 
Au Bon Coing.

The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery. 
It was falling into disuse.  Dampness was invading it, the flowers
were deserting it.  The bourgeois did not care much about being
buried in the Vaugirard; it hinted at poverty.  Pere-Lachaise if
you please! to be buried in Pere-Lachaise is equivalent to having
furniture of mahogany.  It is recognized as elegant.  The Vaugirard
cemetery was a venerable enclosure, planted like an old-fashioned
French garden.  Straight alleys, box, thuya-trees, holly,
ancient tombs beneath aged cypress-trees, and very tall grass. 
In the evening it was tragic there.  There were very lugubrious lines
about it.

The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and
the black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery. 
The lame man who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent.

The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar,
the exit of Cosette, the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room,--
all had been executed without difficulty, and there had been no hitch.

Let us remark in passing, that the burial of Mother Crucifixion
under the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence
in our sight.  It is one of the faults which resemble a duty. 
The nuns had committed it, not only without difficulty, but even
with the applause of their own consciences.  In the cloister, what is
called the "government" is only an intermeddling with authority,
an interference which is always questionable.  In the first place,
the rule; as for the code, we shall see.  Make as many laws
as you please, men; but keep them for yourselves.  The tribute
to Caesar is never anything but the remnants of the tribute to God. 
A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle.

Fauchelevent limped along behind the hearse in a very contented
frame of mind.  His twin plots, the one with the nuns, the one
for the convent, the other against it, the other with M. Madeleine,
had succeeded, to all appearance.  Jean Valjean's composure
was one of those powerful tranquillities which are contagious. 
Fauchelevent no longer felt doubtful as to his success.

What remained to be done was a mere nothing.  Within the last
two years, he had made good Father Mestienne, a chubby-cheeked person,
drunk at least ten times.  He played with Father Mestienne.  He did
what he liked with him.  He made him dance according to his whim. 
Mestienne's head adjusted itself to the cap of Fauchelevent's will. 
Fauchelevent's confidence was perfect.

At the moment when the convoy entered the avenue leading to the cemetery,
Fauchelevent glanced cheerfully at the hearse, and said half aloud,
as he rubbed his big hands:--

"Here's a fine farce!"

All at once the hearse halted; it had reached the gate.  The permission
for interment must be exhibited.  The undertaker's man addressed
himself to the porter of the cemetery.  During this colloquy,
which always is productive of a delay of from one to two minutes,
some one, a stranger, came and placed himself behind the hearse,
beside Fauchelevent.  He was a sort of laboring man, who wore a
waistcoat with large pockets and carried a mattock under his arm.

Fauchelevent surveyed this stranger.

"Who are you?" he demanded.

"The man replied:--

"The grave-digger."

If a man could survive the blow of a cannon-ball full in the breast,
he would make the same face that Fauchelevent made.

"The grave-digger?"

"Yes."

"You?"

"I."

"Father Mestienne is the grave-digger."

"He was."

"What!  He was?"

"He is dead."

Fauchelevent had expected anything but this, that a grave-digger
could die.  It is true, nevertheless, that grave-diggers do
die themselves.  By dint of excavating graves for other people,
one hollows out one's own.

Fauchelevent stood there with his mouth wide open.  He had hardly
the strength to stammer:--

"But it is not possible!"

"It is so."

"But," he persisted feebly, "Father Mestienne is the grave-digger."

"After Napoleon, Louis XVIII.  After Mestienne, Gribier. 
Peasant, my name is Gribier."

Fauchelevent, who was deadly pale, stared at this Gribier.

He was a tall, thin, livid, utterly funereal man.  He had the air
of an unsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger.

Fauchelevent burst out laughing.

"Ah!" said he, "what queer things do happen!  Father Mestienne
is dead, but long live little Father Lenoir!  Do you know who little
Father Lenoir is?  He is a jug of red wine.  It is a jug of Surene,
morbigou! of real Paris Surene?  Ah!  So old Mestienne is dead! 
I am sorry for it; he was a jolly fellow.  But you are a jolly
fellow, too.  Are you not, comrade?  We'll go and have a drink
together presently."

The man replied:--

"I have been a student.  I passed my fourth examination. 
I never drink."

The hearse had set out again, and was rolling up the grand alley
of the cemetery.

Fauchelevent had slackened his pace.  He limped more out of anxiety
than from infirmity.

The grave-digger walked on in front of him.

Fauchelevent passed the unexpected Gribier once more in review.

He was one of those men who, though very young, have the air of age,
and who, though slender, are extremely strong.

"Comrade!" cried Fauchelevent.

The man turned round.

"I am the convent grave-digger."

"My colleague," said the man.

Fauchelevent, who was illiterate but very sharp, understood that he
had to deal with a formidable species of man, with a fine talker. 
He muttered:

"So Father Mestienne is dead."

The man replied:--

"Completely.  The good God consulted his note-book which shows when
the time is up.  It was Father Mestienne's turn.  Father Mestienne died."

Fauchelevent repeated mechanically:  "The good God--"

"The good God," said the man authoritatively.  "According to
the philosophers, the Eternal Father; according to the Jacobins,
the Supreme Being."

"Shall we not make each other's acquaintance?" stammered Fauchelevent.

"It is made.  You are a peasant, I am a Parisian."

"People do not know each other until they have drunk together. 
He who empties his glass empties his heart.  You must come and have
a drink with me.  Such a thing cannot be refused."

"Business first."

Fauchelevent thought:  "I am lost."

They were only a few turns of the wheel distant from the small
alley leading to the nuns' corner.

The grave-digger resumed:--

"Peasant, I have seven small children who must be fed.  As they
must eat, I cannot drink."

And he added, with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning
a phrase well:--

"Their hunger is the enemy of my thirst."

The hearse skirted a clump of cypress-trees, quitted the grand alley,
turned into a narrow one, entered the waste land, and plunged into
a thicket.  This indicated the immediate proximity of the place
of sepulture.  Fauchelevent slackened his pace, but he could not
detain the hearse.  Fortunately, the soil, which was light and wet
with the winter rains, clogged the wheels and retarded its speed.

He approached the grave-digger.

"They have such a nice little Argenteuil wine," murmured Fauchelevent.

"Villager," retorted the man, "I ought not be a grave-digger. My
father was a porter at the Prytaneum [Town-Hall]. He destined me
for literature.  But he had reverses.  He had losses on 'change. 
I was obliged to renounce the profession of author.  But I am still
a public writer."

"So you are not a grave-digger, then?" returned Fauchelevent,
clutching at this branch, feeble as it was.

"The one does not hinder the other.  I cumulate."

Fauchelevent did not understand this last word.

"Come have a drink," said he.

Here a remark becomes necessary.  Fauchelevent, whatever his anguish,
offered a drink, but he did not explain himself on one point; who was
to pay?  Generally, Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid. 
An offer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation
created by the new grave-digger, and it was necessary to make
this offer, but the old gardener left the proverbial quarter of an hour
named after Rabelais in the dark, and that not unintentionally. 
As for himself, Fauchelevent did not wish to pay, troubled as he was.

The grave-digger went on with a superior smile:--

"One must eat.  I have accepted Father Mestienne's reversion. 
One gets to be a philosopher when one has nearly completed
his classes.  To the labor of the hand I join the labor of the arm. 
I have my scrivener's stall in the market of the Rue de Sevres. 
You know? the Umbrella Market.  All the cooks of the Red Cross apply
to me.  I scribble their declarations of love to the raw soldiers. 
In the morning I write love letters; in the evening I dig graves. 
Such is life, rustic."

The hearse was still advancing.  Fauchelevent, uneasy to the
last degree, was gazing about him on all sides.  Great drops
of perspiration trickled down from his brow.

"But," continued the grave-digger, "a man cannot serve two mistresses. 
I must choose between the pen and the mattock.  The mattock is
ruining my hand."

The hearse halted.

The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach, then the priest.

One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little
on a pile of earth, beyond which an open grave was visible.

"What a farce this is!" repeated Fauchelevent in consternation.



CHAPTER VI

BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS


Who was in the coffin?  The reader knows.  Jean Valjean.

Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there,
and he could almost breathe.

It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience
confers security of the rest.  Every combination thought out
by Jean Valjean had been progressing, and progressing favorably,
since the preceding day.  He, like Fauchelevent, counted on
Father Mestienne.  He had no doubt as to the end.  Never was
there a more critical situation, never more complete composure.

The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace. 
It seemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into
Jean Valjean's tranquillity.

From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow,
and he had followed, all the phases of the terrible drama which he
was playing with death.

Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank,
Jean Valjean had felt himself carried out, then driven off.  He knew,
from the diminution in the jolting, when they left the pavements
and reached the earth road.  He had divined, from a dull noise,
that they were crossing the bridge of Austerlitz.  At the first halt,
he had understood that they were entering the cemetery; at the
second halt, he said to himself:--

"Here is the grave."

Suddenly, he felt hands seize the coffin, then a harsh grating
against the planks; he explained it to himself as the rope which was
being fastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity.

Then he experienced a giddiness.

The undertaker's man and the grave-digger had probably allowed
the coffin to lose its balance, and had lowered the head before
the foot.  He recovered himself fully when he felt himself
horizontal and motionless.  He had just touched the bottom.

He had a certain sensation of cold.

A voice rose above him, glacial and solemn.  He heard Latin words,
which he did not understand, pass over him, so slowly that he was
able to catch them one by one:--

"Qui dormiunt in terrae pulvere, evigilabunt; alii in vitam aeternam,
et alii in approbrium, ut videant semper."

A child's voice said:--

"De profundis."

The grave voice began again:--

"Requiem aeternam dona ei, Domine."

The child's voice responded:--

"Et lux perpetua luceat ei."

He heard something like the gentle patter of several drops of rain
on the plank which covered him.  It was probably the holy water.

He thought:  "This will be over soon now.  Patience for a
little while longer.  The priest will take his departure. 
Fauchelevent will take Mestienne off to drink.  I shall be left. 
Then Fauchelevent will return alone, and I shall get out. 
That will be the work of a good hour."

The grave voice resumed

"Requiescat in pace."

And the child's voice said:--

"Amen."

Jean Valjean strained his ears, and heard something
like retreating footsteps.

"There, they are going now," thought he.  "I am alone."

All at once, he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him
to be a clap of thunder.

It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin.

A second shovelful fell.

One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up.

A third shovelful of earth fell.

Then a fourth.

There are things which are too strong for the strongest man. 
Jean Valjean lost consciousness.



CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE ORIGIN OF THE SAYING:  DON'T LOSE THE
CARD


This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay Jean Valjean.

When the hearse had driven off, when the priest and the choir
boy had entered the carriage again and taken their departure,
Fauchelevent, who had not taken his eyes from the grave-digger,
saw the latter bend over and grasp his shovel, which was sticking
upright in the heap of dirt.

Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve.

He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger, crossed
his arms and said:--

"I am the one to pay!"

The grave-digger stared at him in amazement, and replied:--

"What's that, peasant?"

Fauchelevent repeated:--

"I am the one who pays!"

"What?"

"For the wine."

"What wine?"

"That Argenteuil wine."

"Where is the Argenteuil?"

"At the Bon Coing."

"Go to the devil!" said the grave-digger.

And he flung a shovelful of earth on the coffin.

The coffin gave back a hollow sound.  Fauchelevent felt himself
stagger and on the point of falling headlong into the grave himself. 
He shouted in a voice in which the strangling sound of the death
rattle began to mingle:--

"Comrade!  Before the Bon Coing is shut!"

The grave-digger took some more earth on his shovel. 
Fauchelevent continued.

"I will pay."

And he seized the man's arm.

"Listen to me, comrade.  I am the convent grave-digger, I have come
to help you.  It is a business which can be performed at night. 
Let us begin, then, by going for a drink."

And as he spoke, and clung to this desperate insistence,
this melancholy reflection occurred to him:  "And if he drinks,
will he get drunk?"

"Provincial," said the man, "if you positively insist upon it,
I consent.  We will drink.  After work, never before."

And he flourished his shovel briskly.  Fauchelevent held him back.

"It is Argenteuil wine, at six."

"Oh, come," said the grave-digger, "you are a bell-ringer. Ding dong,
ding dong, that's all you know how to say.  Go hang yourself."

And he threw in a second shovelful.

Fauchelevent had reached a point where he no longer knew what he
was saying.

"Come along and drink," he cried, "since it is I who pays the bill."

"When we have put the child to bed," said the grave-digger.

He flung in a third shovelful.

Then he thrust his shovel into the earth and added:--

"It's cold to-night, you see, and the corpse would shriek out
after us if we were to plant her there without a coverlet."

At that moment, as he loaded his shovel, the grave-digger bent over,
and the pocket of his waistcoat gaped.  Fauchelevent's wild gaze
fell mechanically into that pocket, and there it stopped.

The sun was not yet hidden behind the horizon; there was still light
enough to enable him to distinguish something white at the bottom
of that yawning pocket.

The sum total of lightning that the eye of a Picard peasant can contain,
traversed Fauchelevent's pupils.  An idea had just occurred to him.

He thrust his hand into the pocket from behind, without the grave-digger,
who was wholly absorbed in his shovelful of earth, observing it,
and pulled out the white object which lay at the bottom of it.

The man sent a fourth shovelful tumbling into the grave.

Just as he turned round to get the fifth, Fauchelevent looked
calmly at him and said:--

"By the way, you new man, have you your card?"

The grave-digger paused.

"What card?"

"The sun is on the point of setting."

"That's good, it is going to put on its nightcap."

"The gate of the cemetery will close immediately."

"Well, what then?"

"Have you your card?"

"Ah! my card?" said the grave-digger.

And he fumbled in his pocket.

Having searched one pocket, he proceeded to search the other. 
He passed on to his fobs, explored the first, returned to the second.

"Why, no," said he, "I have not my card.  I must have forgotten it."

"Fifteen francs fine," said Fauchelevent.

The grave-digger turned green.  Green is the pallor of livid people.

"Ah!  Jesus-mon-Dieu-bancroche-a-bas-la-lune!"[17] he exclaimed. 
"Fifteen francs fine!"


[17] Jesus-my-God-bandy-leg--down with the moon!


"Three pieces of a hundred sous," said Fauchelevent.

The grave-digger dropped his shovel.

Fauchelevent's turn had come.

"Ah, come now, conscript," said Fauchelevent, "none of this despair. 
There is no question of committing suicide and benefiting the grave. 
Fifteen francs is fifteen francs, and besides, you may not be able
to pay it.  I am an old hand, you are a new one.  I know all the
ropes and the devices.  I will give you some friendly advice. 
One thing is clear, the sun is on the point of setting, it is touching
the dome now, the cemetery will be closed in five minutes more."

"That is true," replied the man.

"Five minutes more and you will not have time to fill the grave,
it is as hollow as the devil, this grave, and to reach the gate
in season to pass it before it is shut."

"That is true."

"In that case, a fine of fifteen francs."

"Fifteen francs."

"But you have time.  Where do you live?"

"A couple of steps from the barrier, a quarter of an hour from here. 
No. 87 Rue de Vaugirard."

"You have just time to get out by taking to your heels at your
best speed."

"That is exactly so."

"Once outside the gate, you gallop home, you get your card,
you return, the cemetery porter admits you.  As you have your card,
there will be nothing to pay.  And you will bury your corpse. 
I'll watch it for you in the meantime, so that it shall not
run away."

"I am indebted to you for my life, peasant."

"Decamp!" said Fauchelevent.

The grave-digger, overwhelmed with gratitude, shook his hand and set
off on a run.

When the man had disappeared in the thicket, Fauchelevent listened
until he heard his footsteps die away in the distance, then he
leaned over the grave, and said in a low tone:--

"Father Madeleine!"

There was no reply.

Fauchelevent was seized with a shudder.  He tumbled rather than
climbed into the grave, flung himself on the head of the coffin
and cried:--

"Are you there?"

Silence in the coffin.

Fauchelevent, hardly able to draw his breath for trembling,
seized his cold chisel and his hammer, and pried up the coffin lid.

Jean Valjean's face appeared in the twilight; it was pale and his
eyes were closed.

Fauchelevent's hair rose upright on his head, he sprang to his feet,
then fell back against the side of the grave, ready to swoon on
the coffin.  He stared at Jean Valjean.

Jean Valjean lay there pallid and motionless.

Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh:--

"He is dead!"

And, drawing himself up, and folding his arms with such violence
that his clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders,
he cried:--

"And this is the way I save his life!"

Then the poor man fell to sobbing.  He soliloquized the while,
for it is an error to suppose that the soliloquy is unnatural. 
Powerful emotion often talks aloud.

"It is Father Mestienne's fault.  Why did that fool die?  What need
was there for him to give up the ghost at the very moment when no
one was expecting it?  It is he who has killed M. Madeleine. 
Father Madeleine!  He is in the coffin.  It is quite handy. 
All is over.  Now, is there any sense in these things? 
Ah! my God! he is dead!  Well! and his little girl, what am
I to do with her?  What will the fruit-seller say?  The idea
of its being possible for a man like that to die like this! 
When I think how he put himself under that cart!  Father Madeleine! 
Father Madeleine!  Pardine!  He was suffocated, I said so. 
He wouldn't believe me.  Well!  Here's a pretty trick to play! 
He is dead, that good man, the very best man out of all the good
God's good folks!  And his little girl!  Ah!  In the first place,
I won't go back there myself.  I shall stay here.  After having
done such a thing as that!  What's the use of being two old men,
if we are two old fools!  But, in the first place, how did he
manage to enter the convent?  That was the beginning of it all. 
One should not do such things.  Father Madeleine!  Father Madeleine! 
Father Madeleine!  Madeleine!  Monsieur Madeleine!  Monsieur le Maire! 
He does not hear me.  Now get out of this scrape if you can!"

And he tore his hair.

A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance. 
It was the cemetery gate closing.

Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean, and all at once he bounded
back and recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit.

Jean Valjean's eyes were open and gazing at him.

To see a corpse is alarming, to behold a resurrection is almost as much
so.  Fauchelevent became like stone, pale, haggard, overwhelmed by all
these excesses of emotion, not knowing whether he had to do with a living
man or a dead one, and staring at Jean Valjean, who was gazing at him.

"I fell asleep," said Jean Valjean.

And he raised himself to a sitting posture.

Fauchelevent fell on his knees.

"Just, good Virgin!  How you frightened me!"

Then he sprang to his feet and cried:--

"Thanks, Father Madeleine!"

Jean Valjean had merely fainted.  The fresh air had revived him.

Joy is the ebb of terror.  Fauchelevent found almost as much
difficulty in recovering himself as Jean Valjean had.

"So you are not dead!  Oh!  How wise you are!  I called you
so much that you came back.  When I saw your eyes shut, I said: 
`Good! there he is, stifled,' I should have gone raving mad,
mad enough for a strait jacket.  They would have put me in Bicetre. 
What do you suppose I should have done if you had been dead? 
And your little girl?  There's that fruit-seller,--she would never
have understood it!  The child is thrust into your arms, and then--
the grandfather is dead!  What a story! good saints of paradise,
what a tale!  Ah! you are alive, that's the best of it!"

"I am cold," said Jean Valjean.

This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality,
and there was pressing need of it.  The souls of these two men were
troubled even when they had recovered themselves, although they
did not realize it, and there was about them something uncanny,
which was the sinister bewilderment inspired by the place.

"Let us get out of here quickly," exclaimed Fauchelevent.

He fumbled in his pocket, and pulled out a gourd with which he
had provided himself.

"But first, take a drop," said he.

The flask finished what the fresh air had begun, Jean Valjean swallowed
a mouthful of brandy, and regained full possession of his faculties.

He got out of the coffin, and helped Fauchelevent to nail
on the lid again.

Three minutes later they were out of the grave.

Moreover, Fauchelevent was perfectly composed.  He took his time. 
The cemetery was closed.  The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier
was not to be apprehended.  That "conscript" was at home busily
engaged in looking for his card, and at some difficulty in finding
it in his lodgings, since it was in Fauchelevent's pocket. 
Without a card, he could not get back into the cemetery.

Fauchelevent took the shovel, and Jean Valjean the pick-axe,
and together they buried the empty coffin.

When the grave was full, Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean:--

"Let us go.  I will keep the shovel; do you carry off the mattock."

Night was falling.

Jean Valjean experienced rome difficulty in moving and in walking. 
He had stiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little
like a corpse.  The rigidity of death had seized upon him between
those four planks.  He had, in a manner, to thaw out, from the tomb.

"You are benumbed," said Fauchelevent.  "It is a pity that I have
a game leg, for otherwise we might step out briskly."

"Bah!" replied Jean Valjean, "four paces will put life into my legs
once more."

They set off by the alleys through which the hearse had passed. 
On arriving before the closed gate and the porter's pavilion Fauchelevent,
who held the grave-digger's card in his hand, dropped it into the box,
the porter pulled the rope, the gate opened, and they went out.

"How well everything is going!" said Fauchelevent; "what a capital
idea that was of yours, Father Madeleine!"

They passed the Vaugirard barrier in the simplest manner in the world. 
In the neighborhood of the cemetery, a shovel and pick are equal
to two passports.

The Rue Vaugirard was deserted.

"Father Madeleine," said Fauchelevent as they went along,
and raising his eyes to the houses, "Your eyes are better than mine. 
Show me No. 87."

"Here it is," said Jean Valjean.

"There is no one in the street," said Fauchelevent.  "Give me
your mattock and wait a couple of minutes for me."

Fauchelevent entered No. 87, ascended to the very top, guided by
the instinct which always leads the poor man to the garret,
and knocked in the dark, at the door of an attic.

A voice replied:  "Come in."

It was Gribier's voice.

Fauchelevent opened the door.  The grave-digger's dwelling was,
like all such wretched habitations, an unfurnished and encumbered garret. 
A packing-case--a coffin, perhaps--took the place of a commode,
a butter-pot served for a drinking-fountain, a straw mattress served
for a bed, the floor served instead of tables and chairs.  In a corner,
on a tattered fragment which had been a piece of an old carpet, a thin
woman and a number of children were piled in a heap.  The whole of this
poverty-stricken interior bore traces of having been overturned. 
One would have said that there had been an earthquake "for one." 
The covers were displaced, the rags scattered about, the jug broken,
the mother had been crying, the children had probably been beaten;
traces of a vigorous and ill-tempered search.  It was plain
that the grave-digger had made a desperate search for his card,
and had made everybody in the garret, from the jug to his wife,
responsible for its loss.  He wore an air of desperation.

But Fauchelevent was in too great a hurry to terminate this adventure
to take any notice of this sad side of his success.

He entered and said:--

"I have brought you back your shovel and pick."

Gribier gazed at him in stupefaction.

"Is it you, peasant?"

"And to-morrow morning you will find your card with the porter
of the cemetery."

And he laid the shovel and mattock on the floor.

"What is the meaning of this?" demanded Gribier.

"The meaning of it is, that you dropped your card out of your pocket,
that I found it on the ground after you were gone, that I have buried
the corpse, that I have filled the grave, that I have done your work,
that the porter will return your card to you, and that you will
not have to pay fifteen francs.  There you have it, conscript."

"Thanks, villager!" exclaimed Gribier, radiant.  "The next time I
will pay for the drinks."



CHAPTER VIII

A SUCCESSFUL INTERROGATORY


An hour later, in the darkness of night, two men and a child
presented themselves at No. 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. The elder
of the men lifted the knocker and rapped.

They were Fauchelevent, Jean Valjean, and Cosette.

The two old men had gone to fetch Cosette from the fruiterer's
in the Rue du Chemin-Vert, where Fauchelevent had deposited
her on the preceding day.  Cosette had passed these twenty-four
hours trembling silently and understanding nothing.  She trembled
to such a degree that she wept.  She had neither eaten nor slept. 
The worthy fruit-seller had plied her with a hundred questions,
without obtaining any other reply than a melancholy and unvarying gaze. 
Cosette had betrayed nothing of what she had seen and heard during the
last two days.  She divined that they were passing through a crisis. 
She was deeply conscious that it was necessary to "be good." 
Who has not experienced the sovereign power of those two words,
pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of a terrified little being: 
Say nothing!  Fear is mute.  Moreover, no one guards a secret like
a child.

But when, at the expiration of these lugubrious twenty-four hours,
she beheld Jean Valjean again, she gave vent to such a cry of joy,
that any thoughtful person who had chanced to hear that cry,
would have guessed that it issued from an abyss.

Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words. All
the doors opened.

Thus was solved the double and alarming problem of how to get
out and how to get in.

The porter, who had received his instructions, opened the little
servant's door which connected the courtyard with the garden,
and which could still be seen from the street twenty years ago,
in the wall at the bottom of the court, which faced the carriage entrance.

The porter admitted all three of them through this door, and from
that point they reached the inner, reserved parlor where Fauchelevent,
on the preceding day, had received his orders from the prioress.

The prioress, rosary in hand, was waiting for them.  A vocal mother,
with her veil lowered, stood beside her.

A discreet candle lighted, one might almost say, made a show
of lighting the parlor.

The prioress passed Jean Valjean in review.  There is nothing
which examines like a downcast eye.

Then she questioned him:--

"You are the brother?"

"Yes, reverend Mother," replied Fauchelevent.

"What is your name?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Ultime Fauchelevent."

He really had had a brother named Ultime, who was dead.

"Where do you come from?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"From Picquigny, near Amiens."

"What is your age?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Fifty."

"What is your profession?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Gardener."

"Are you a good Christian?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Every one is in the family."

"Is this your little girl?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Yes, reverend Mother."

"You are her father?"

Fauchelevent replied:--

"Her grandfather."

The vocal mother said to the prioress in a low voice

"He answers well."

Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word.

The prioress looked attentively at Cosette, and said half aloud
to the vocal mother:--

"She will grow up ugly."

The two mothers consulted for a few moments in very low tones in
the corner of the parlor, then the prioress turned round and said:--

"Father Fauvent, you will get another knee-cap with a bell. 
Two will be required now."

On the following day, therefore, two bells were audible in the garden,
and the nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner
of their veils.  At the extreme end of the garden, under the trees,
two men, Fauvent and another man, were visible as they dug side
by side.  An enormous event.  Their silence was broken to the extent
of saying to each other:  "He is an assistant gardener."

The vocal mothers added:  "He is a brother of Father Fauvent."

Jean Valjean was, in fact, regularly installed; he had his belled
knee-cap; henceforth he was official.  His name was Ultime Fauchelevent.

The most powerful determining cause of his admission had been
the prioress's observation upon Cosette:  "She will grow up ugly."

The prioress, that pronounced prognosticator, immediately took a fancy
to Cosette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil.

There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this.

It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent, women are
conscious of their faces; now, girls who are conscious of their
beauty do not easily become nuns; the vocation being voluntary
in inverse proportion to their good looks, more is to be hoped from
the ugly than from the pretty.  Hence a lively taste for plain girls.

The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good,
old Fauchelevent; he won a triple success; in the eyes of Jean Valjean,
whom he had saved and sheltered; in those of grave-digger Gribier,
who said to himself:  "He spared me that fine"; with the convent,
which, being enabled, thanks to him, to retain the coffin of Mother
Crucifixion under the altar, eluded Caesar and satisfied God. 
There was a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus, and a coffin
without a body in the Vaugirard cemetery, public order had no doubt
been deeply disturbed thereby, but no one was aware of it.

As for the convent, its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great. 
Fauchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious
of gardeners.  Upon the occasion of the archbishop's next visit,
the prioress recounted the affair to his Grace, making something
of a confession at the same time, and yet boasting of her deed. 
On leaving the convent, the archbishop mentioned it with approval,
and in a whisper to M. de Latil, Monsieur's confessor,
afterwards Archbishop of Reims and Cardinal.  This admiration
for Fauchelevent became widespread, for it made its way to Rome. 
We have seen a note addressed by the then reigning Pope, Leo XII.,
to one of his relatives, a Monsignor in the Nuncio's establishment
in Paris, and bearing, like himself, the name of Della Genga;
it contained these lines:  "It appears that there is in a convent in
Paris an excellent gardener, who is also a holy man, named Fauvent." 
Nothing of this triumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut;
he went on grafting, weeding, and covering up his melon beds,
without in the least suspecting his excellences and his sanctity. 
Neither did he suspect his glory, any more than a Durham or Surrey
bull whose portrait is published in the London Illustrated News,
with this inscription:  "Bull which carried off the prize at the
Cattle Show."



CHAPTER IX

CLOISTERED


Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent.

It was quite natural that Cosette should think herself Jean Valjean's
daughter.  Moreover, as she knew nothing, she could say nothing,
and then, she would not have said anything in any case.  As we have
just observed, nothing trains children to silence like unhappiness. 
Cosette had suffered so much, that she feared everything,
even to speak or to breathe.  A single word had so often brought
down an avalanche upon her.  She had hardly begun to regain her
confidence since she had been with Jean Valjean.  She speedily
became accustomed to the convent.  Only she regretted Catherine,
but she dared not say so.  Once, however, she did say to Jean Valjean: 
"Father, if I had known, I would have brought her away with me."

Cosette had been obliged, on becoming a scholar in the convent,
to don the garb of the pupils of the house.  Jean Valjean succeeded
in getting them to restore to him the garments which she laid aside. 
This was the same mourning suit which he had made her put on when she
had quitted the Thenardiers' inn.  It was not very threadbare even now. 
Jean Valjean locked up these garments, plus the stockings and the shoes,
with a quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents
abound, in a little valise which he found means of procuring. 
He set this valise on a chair near his bed, and he always carried
the key about his person.  "Father," Cosette asked him one day,
"what is there in that box which smells so good?"

Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action,
in addition to the glory which we just mentioned, and of which he
knew nothing; in the first place it made him happy; next, he had
much less work, since it was shared.  Lastly, as he was very fond
of snuff, he found the presence of M. Madeleine an advantage,
in that he used three times as much as he had done previously,
and that in an infinitely more luxurious manner, seeing that
M. Madeleine paid for it.

The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime; they called Jean Valjean
the other Fauvent.

If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert's glance,
they would eventually have noticed that when there was any errand
to be done outside in the behalf of the garden, it was always the
elder Fauchelevent, the old, the infirm, the lame man, who went,
and never the other; but whether it is that eyes constantly fixed
on God know not how to spy, or whether they were, by preference,
occupied in keeping watch on each other, they paid no heed to this.

Moreover, it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did
not stir out.  Javert watched the quarter for more than a month.

This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded
by gulfs.  Henceforth, those four walls constituted his world. 
He saw enough of the sky there to enable him to preserve his serenity,
and Cosette enough to remain happy.

A very sweet life began for him.

He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden, in company
with Fauchelevent.  This hovel, built of old rubbish, which was still
in existence in 1845, was composed, as the reader already knows,
of three chambers, all of which were utterly bare and had nothing
beyond the walls.  The principal one had been given up, by force,
for Jean Valjean had opposed it in vain, to M. Madeleine,
by Father Fauchelevent.  The walls of this chamber had for ornament,
in addition to the two nails whereon to hang the knee-cap and
the basket, a Royalist bank-note of '93, applied to the wall over
the chimney-piece, and of which the following is an exact facsimile:--


{GRAPHIC HERE}


This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall
by the preceding gardener, an old Chouan, who had died in the convent,
and whose place Fauchelevent had taken.

Jean Valjean worked in the garden every day and made himself very useful. 
He had formerly been a pruner of trees, and he gladly found himself
a gardener once more.  It will be remembered that he knew all sorts
of secrets and receipts for agriculture.  He turned these to advantage. 
Almost all the trees in the orchard were ungrafted, and wild. 
He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit.

Cosette had permission to pass an hour with him every day. 
As the sisters were melancholy and he was kind, the child made
comparisons and adored him.  At the appointed hour she flew to the hut. 
When she entered the lowly cabin, she filled it with paradise. 
Jean Valjean blossomed out and felt his happiness increase
with the happiness which he afforded Cosette.  The joy which we
inspire has this charming property, that, far from growing meagre,
like all reflections, it returns to us more radiant than ever. 
At recreation hours, Jean Valjean watched her running and playing
in the distance, and he distinguished her laugh from that of
the rest.

For Cosette laughed now.

Cosette's face had even undergone a change, to a certain extent. 
The gloom had disappeared from it.  A smile is the same as sunshine;
it banishes winter from the human countenance.

Recreation over, when Cosette went into the house again,
Jean Valjean gazed at the windows of her class-room,
and at night he rose to look at the windows of her dormitory.

God has his own ways, moreover; the convent contributed, like Cosette,
to uphold and complete the Bishop's work in Jean Valjean.  It is
certain that virtue adjoins pride on one side.  A bridge built by the
devil exists there.  Jean Valjean had been, unconsciously, perhaps,
tolerably near that side and that bridge, when Providence cast his
lot in the convent of the Petit-Picpus; so long as he had compared
himself only to the Bishop, he had regarded himself as unworthy
and had remained humble; but for some time past he had been comparing
himself to men in general, and pride was beginning to spring up. 
Who knows?  He might have ended by returning very gradually to hatred.

The convent stopped him on that downward path.

This was the second place of captivity which he had seen. 
In his youth, in what had been for him the beginning of his life,
and later on, quite recently again, he had beheld another,--
a frightful place, a terrible place, whose severities had always
appeared to him the iniquity of justice, and the crime of the law. 
Now, after the galleys, he saw the cloister; and when he meditated
how he had formed a part of the galleys, and that he now, so to speak,
was a spectator of the cloister, he confronted the two in his own
mind with anxiety.

Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe, and slowly
descended the endless spirals of revery.

He recalled his former companions:  how wretched they were;
they rose at dawn, and toiled until night; hardly were they permitted
to sleep; they lay on camp beds, where nothing was tolerated but
mattresses two inches thick, in rooms which were heated only in the
very harshest months of the year; they were clothed in frightful
red blouses; they were allowed, as a great favor, linen trousers
in the hottest weather, and a woollen carter's blouse on their
backs when it was very cold; they drank no wine, and ate no meat,
except when they went on "fatigue duty."  They lived nameless,
designated only by numbers, and converted, after a manner,
into ciphers themselves, with downcast eyes, with lowered voices,
with shorn heads, beneath the cudgel and in disgrace.

Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes.

These beings also lived with shorn heads, with downcast eyes,
with lowered voices, not in disgrace, but amid the scoffs of the world,
not with their backs bruised with the cudgel, but with their shoulders
lacerated with their discipline.  Their names, also, had vanished from
among men; they no longer existed except under austere appellations. 
They never ate meat and they never drank wine; they often remained
until evening without food; they were attired, not in a red blouse,
but in a black shroud, of woollen, which was heavy in summer and thin
in winter, without the power to add or subtract anything from it;
without having even, according to the season, the resource of the
linen garment or the woollen cloak; and for six months in the year
they wore serge chemises which gave them fever.  They dwelt, not in
rooms warmed only during rigorous cold, but in cells where no fire
was ever lighted; they slept, not on mattresses two inches thick,
but on straw.  And finally, they were not even allowed their sleep;
every night, after a day of toil, they were obliged, in the weariness
of their first slumber, at the moment when they were falling sound
asleep and beginning to get warm, to rouse themselves, to rise and
to go and pray in an ice-cold and gloomy chapel, with their knees
on the stones.

On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelve
successive hours in a kneeling posture, or prostrate, with face
upon the pavement, and arms outstretched in the form of a cross.

The others were men; these were women.

What had those men done?  They had stolen, violated,
pillaged, murdered, assassinated.  They were bandits,
counterfeiters, poisoners, incendiaries, murderers,
parricides.  What had these women done?  They had done nothing whatever.

On the one hand, highway robbery, fraud, deceit, violence,
sensuality, homicide, all sorts of sacrilege, every variety
of crime; on the other, one thing only, innocence.

Perfect innocence, almost caught up into heaven in a mysterious
assumption, attached to the earth by virtue, already possessing
something of heaven through holiness.

On the one hand, confidences over crimes, which are exchanged
in whispers; on the other, the confession of faults made aloud. 
And what crimes!  And what faults!

On the one hand, miasms; on the other, an ineffable perfume. 
On the one hand, a moral pest, guarded from sight, penned up under the
range of cannon, and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims;
on the other, the chaste flame of all souls on the same hearth. 
There, darkness; here, the shadow; but a shadow filled with gleams
of light, and of gleams full of radiance.

Two strongholds of slavery; but in the first, deliverance possible,
a legal limit always in sight, and then, escape.  In the second,
perpetuity; the sole hope, at the distant extremity of the future,
that faint light of liberty which men call death.

In the first, men are bound only with chains; in the other,
chained by faith.

What flowed from the first?  An immense curse, the gnashing of teeth,
hatred, desperate viciousness, a cry of rage against human society,
a sarcasm against heaven.

What results flowed from the second?  Blessings and love.

And in these two places, so similar yet so unlike, these two species of
beings who were so very unlike, were undergoing the same work, expiation.

Jean Valjean understood thoroughly the expiation of the former;
that personal expiation, the expiation for one's self.  But he
did not understand that of these last, that of creatures without
reproach and without stain, and he trembled as he asked himself: 
The expiation of what?  What expiation?

A voice within his conscience replied:  "The most divine
of human generosities, the expiation for others."

Here all personal theory is withheld; we are only the narrator;
we place ourselves at Jean Valjean's point of view, and we translate
his impressions.

Before his eyes he had the sublime summit of abnegation,
the highest possible pitch of virtue; the innocence which
pardons men their faults, and which expiates in their stead;
servitude submitted to, torture accepted, punishment claimed
by souls which have not sinned, for the sake of sparing it
to souls which have fallen; the love of humanity swallowed up
in the love of God, but even there preserving its distinct and
mediatorial character; sweet and feeble beings possessing the misery
of those who are punished and the smile of those who are recompensed.

And he remembered that he had dared to murmur!

Often, in the middle of the night, he rose to listen to the grateful
song of those innocent creatures weighed down with severities,
and the blood ran cold in his veins at the thought that those who were
justly chastised raised their voices heavenward only in blasphemy,
and that he, wretch that he was, had shaken his fist at God.

There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply,
like a warning whisper from Providence itself:  the scaling of that wall,
the passing of those barriers, the adventure accepted even at the risk
of death, the painful and difficult ascent, all those efforts even,
which he had made to escape from that other place of expiation,
he had made in order to gain entrance into this one.  Was this
a symbol of his destiny?  This house was a prison likewise and bore
a melancholy resemblance to that other one whence he had fled,
and yet he had never conceived an idea of anything similar.

Again he beheld gratings, bolts, iron bars--to guard whom?  Angels.

These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers, he now beheld
once more around lambs.

This was a place of expiation, and not of punishment; and yet,
it was still more austere, more gloomy, and more pitiless than
the other.

These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts. 
A cold, harsh wind, that wind which had chilled his youth,
traversed the barred and padlocked grating of the vultures; a still
harsher and more biting breeze blew in the cage of these doves.

Why?

When he thought on these things, all that was within him was lost
in amazement before this mystery of sublimity.

In these meditations, his pride vanished.  He scrutinized his own
heart in all manner of ways; he felt his pettiness, and many a time
he wept.  All that had entered into his life for the last six
months had led him back towards the Bishop's holy injunctions;
Cosette through love, the convent through humility.

Sometimes at eventide, in the twilight, at an hour when the garden
was deserted, he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk
which skirted the chapel, in front of the window through which he had
gazed on the night of his arrival, and turned towards the spot where,
as he knew, the sister was making reparation, prostrated in prayer. 
Thus he prayed as he knelt before the sister.

It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God.

Everything that surrounded him, that peaceful garden, those fragrant
flowers, those children who uttered joyous cries, those grave
and simple women, that silent cloister, slowly permeated him,
and little by little, his soul became compounded of silence
like the cloister, of perfume like the flowers, of simplicity
like the women, of joy like the children.  And then he reflected
that these had been two houses of God which had received him
in succession at two critical moments in his life:  the first,
when all doors were closed and when human society rejected him;
the second, at a moment when human society had again set out in
pursuit of him, and when the galleys were again yawning; and that,
had it not been for the first, he should have relapsed into crime,
and had it not been for the second, into torment.

His whole heart melted in gratitude, and he loved more and more.

Many years passed in this manner; Cosette was growing up.


[The end of Volume II.  "Cosette"]


