   The Rum Diary

   The Long Lost Novel

   by Hunter S. Thompson

   eVersion 4.0 / Notes at EOF

   Back Cover Blurbs

   Begun in 1959 by a then-twenty-two-year-old Hunter S. Thompson, The Rum
   Diary is a brilliantly tangled love story of jealousy, treachery and
   violent alcoholic lust in the Caribbean boomtown that was San Juan, Puerto
   Rico, in the late 1950s. Exuberant and mad, youthful and energetic, The
   Rum Diary is an outrageous, drunken romp in the spirit of Thompson's
   bestselling Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and Hell's Angels.

   "A great and an unexpected joy. . . reveals a young Hunter Thompson
   brimming with talent." -- The Philadelphia Inquirer

   "The tools Hunter S. Thompson would use in the years ahead -- bizarre wit,
   mockery without end, redundant excess, supreme self-confidence, the
   narrative of the wounded meritorious ego, and the idiopathic anger of the
   righteous outlaw -- were all there in his precocious imagination in San
   Juan. There, too were the beginnings of his future as a masterful prose
   stylist." -- William Kennedy, Pulitzer Prize-winning author of Ironweed

   ''The Rum Diary shows a side of human nature that is ugly and wrong. But
   it is a world that Hunter Thompson knows in the nerves of his neck. This
   is a brilliant tribal study and a bone in the throat of all decent
   people." -- Jimmy Buffett

   HUNTER S. THOMPSON  was born and raised in Louisville, Kentucky. His books
   include Hell's Angels, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, Fear and Loathing:
   On the Campaign Trail '72, The Curse of Lono, Songs of the Doomed, Better
   Than Sex, and The Proud Highway. He is a regular contributor to Rolling
   Stone and other national and international publications.

                           SCHIBNER PAPERBACK FICTION

                             Simon & Schuster Inc.

                               Rockefeller Center

                          1250 Avenue of the Americas

                               New York, NY 10020

    This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents

   either are products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

    Any resemblance to actual events or locales or persons, living or dead,

                           is entirely coincidental.

                 Copyright © 1998 by Gonzo International Corp.

    All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in
                               part in any form.

                 First Scribner Paperback Fiction edition 1999

            Scribner Paperback Fiction and design are trademarks of

          Macmillan Library Reference USA, Inc., used under license by

                 Simon & Schuster, the publisher of this work.

                Map copyright © 1998 by Anita Karl and Jim Kemp

                               ISBN 0-684-85521-6

                             0-684-85647-6 (Pbk) 5

   To Heidi Opheim, Marysue Rued and Dana Kennedy

                          My rider of the bright eyes,

                          What happened you yesterday?

                           I thought you in my heart,

                        When I bought your fine clothes,

                        A man the world could not slay.

                         -- Dark Eileen O'Connell, 1773

   San Juan, Winter of 1958

   In the early Fifties, when San Juan first became a tourist town, an
   ex-jockey named Al Arbonito built a bar in the patio behind his house on
   Calle O'Leary. He called it Al's Backyard and hung a sign above his
   doorway on the street, with an arrow pointing between two ramshackle
   buildings to the patio in back. At first he served nothing but beer, at
   twenty cents a bottle, and rum, at a dime a shot or fifteen cents with
   ice. After several months he began serving hamburgers, which he made
   himself.

   It was a pleasant place to drink, especially in the mornings when the sun
   was still cool and the salt mist came up from the ocean to give the air a
   crisp, healthy smell that for a few early hours would hold its own against
   the steaming, sweaty heat that clamps San Juan at noon and remains until
   long after sundown.

   It was good in the evenings, too, but not so cool. Sometimes there would
   be a breeze and Al's would usually catch it because of the fine location
   -- at the very top of Calle O'Leary hill, so high that if the patio had
   windows you could look down on the whole city. But there is a thick wall
   around the patio, and all you can see is the sky and a few plantain trees.

   As time passed, Al bought a new cash register, then he bought wood
   umbrella-tables for the patio; and finally moved his family out of the
   house on Calle O'Leary, out in the suburbs to a new urban-izacion near the
   airport. He hired a large negro named Sweep, who washed the dishes and
   carried hamburgers and eventually learned to cook.

   He turned his old living room into a small piano bar, and got a pianist
   from Miami, a thin, sad-faced man called Nelson Otto. The piano was midway
   between the cocktail lounge and the patio. It was an old baby-grand,
   painted light grey and covered with special shellac to keep the salt air
   from ruining the finish -- and seven nights a week, through all twelve
   months of the endless Caribbean summer, Nelson Otto sat down at the
   keyboard to mingle his sweat with the weary chords of his music.

   At the Tourist Bureau they talk about the cooling trade winds that caress
   the shores of Puerto Rico every day and night of the year -- but Nelson
   Otto was a man the trade winds never seemed to touch. Hour after muggy
   hour, through a tired repertoire of blues and sentimental ballads, the
   sweat dripped from his chin and soaked the armpits of his flowered cotton
   sportshirts. He cursed the "goddamn shitting heat" with such violence and
   such hatred that it sometimes ruined the atmosphere of the place, and
   people would get up and walk down the street to the Flamboyan Lounge,
   where a bottle of beer cost sixty cents and a sirloin steak was
   three-fifty.

   When an ex-communist named Lotterman came down from Florida to start the
   San Juan Daily News, Al's Backyard became the English-language press club,
   because none of the drifters and the dreamers who came to work for
   Lotterman's new paper could afford the high-price "New York" bars that
   were springing up all over the city like a rash of neon toadstools. The
   day-shift reporters and deskmen straggled in about seven, and the
   night-shift types -- sports people, proofreaders and make-up men --
   usually arrived en masse around midnight. Once in a while someone had a
   date, but on any normal night a girl in Al's Backyard was a rare and
   erotic sight. White girls were not plentiful in San Juan, and most of them
   were either tourists, hustlers or airline stewardesses. It was not
   surprising that they preferred the casinos or the terrace bar at the
   Hilton.

   All manner of men came to work for the News: everything from wild young
   Turks who wanted to rip the world in half and start all over again -- to
   tired, beer-bellied old hacks who wanted nothing more than to live out
   their days in peace before a bunch of lunatics ripped the world in half.

   They ran the whole gamut from genuine talents and honest men, to
   degenerates and hopeless losers who could barely write a postcard -- loons
   and fugitives and dangerous drunks, a shoplifting Cuban who carried a gun
   in his armpit, a half-wit Mexican who molested small children, pimps and
   pederasts and human chancres of every description, most of them working
   just long enough to make the price of a few drinks and a plane ticket.

   On the other hand, there were people like Tom Vanderwitz, who later worked
   for the Washington Post and won a Pulitzer Prize. And a man named Tyrrell,
   now an editor of the London Times, who worked fifteen hours a day just to
   keep the paper from going under.

   When I arrived the News was three years old and Ed Lotterman was on the
   verge of a breakdown. To hear him talk you would think he'd been sitting
   at the very cross-corners of the earth, seeing himself as a combination of
   God, Pulitzer and the Salvation Army. He often swore that if all the
   people who had worked for the paper in those years could appear at one
   time before the throne of The Almighty -- if they all stood there and
   recited their histories and their quirks and their crimes and their
   deviations -- there was no doubt in his mind that God himself would fall
   down in a swoon and tear his hair.

   Of course Lotterman exaggerated; in his tirade he forgot about the good
   men and talked only about what he called the "wineheads." But there were
   more than a few of these, and the best that can be said of that staff is
   that they were a strange and unruly lot. At best they were unreliable, and
   at worst they were drunk, dirty and no mare dependable than goats. But
   they managed to put out a paper, and when they were not working a good
   many of them passed the time drinking in Al's Backyard.

   They bitched and groaned when -- in what some of them called "a fit of
   greed" -- Al jacked the price of beer up to a quarter; and they kept on
   bitching until he tacked up a sign listing beer and drink prices at the
   Caribe Hilton. It was scrawled in black crayon and hung in plain sight
   behind the bar.

   Since the newspaper functioned as a clearing-house for every writer,
   photographer and neo-literate con man who happened to find himself in
   Puerto Rico, Al got the dubious benefit of this trade too. The drawer
   beneath the cash register was full of unpaid tabs and letters from all
   over the world, promising to "get that bill squared away in the near
   future." Vagrant journalists are notorious welshers, and to those who
   travel in that rootless world, a large unpaid bar tab can be a fashionable
   burden.

   There was no shortage of people to drink with in those days. They never
   lasted very long, but they kept coming. I call them vagrant journalists
   because no other term would be quite as valid. No two were alike. They
   were professionally deviant, but they had a few things in common. They
   depended, mostly from habit, on newspapers and magazines for the bulk of
   their income; their lives were geared to long chances and sudden movement;
   and they claimed no allegiance to any flag and valued no currency but luck
   and good contacts.

   Some of them were more journalists than vagrants, and others were more
   vagrants than journalists -- but with afew exceptions they were part-time,
   freelance, would-be foreign correspondents who, for one reason or another,
   lived at several removes from the journalistic establishment. Not the
   slick strivers and jingo parrots who staffed the mossback papers and news
   magazines of the Luce empire. Those were a different breed.

   Puerto Rico was a backwater and the Daily News was staffed mainly by
   ill-tempered wandering rabble. They moved erratically, on the winds of
   rumor and opportunity, all over Europe, Latin America and the Far East --
   wherever there were English-language newspapers, jumping from one to
   another, looking always for the big break, the crucial assignment, the
   rich heiress or the fat job at the far end of the next plane ticket.

   In a sense I was one of them -- more competent than some and more stable
   than others -- and in the years that I carried that ragged banner I was
   seldom unemployed. Sometimes I worked for three newspapers at once. I
   wrote ad copy for new casinos and bowling alleys. I was a consultant for
   the cockfighting syndicate, an utterly corrupt high-end restaurant critic,
   a yachting photographer and a routine victim of police brutality. It was a
   greedy life and I was good at it. I made some interesting friends, had
   enough money to get around, and learned a lot about the world that I could
   never have learned in any other way.

   Like most of the others, I was a seeker, a mover, a malcontent, and at
   times a stupid hell-raiser. I was never idle long enough to do much
   thinking, but I felt somehow that my instincts were right. I shared a
   vagrant optimism that some of us were making real progress, that we had
   taken an honest road, and that the best of us would inevitably make it
   over the top.

   At the same time, I shared a dark suspicion that the life we were leading
   was a lost cause, that we were all actors, kidding ourselves along on a
   senseless odyssey. It was the tension between these two poles -- a
   restless idealism on one hand and a sense of impending doom on the other
   -- that kept me going.

   One

   My apartment in New York was on Perry Street, a five minute walk from the
   White Horse. I often drank there, but I was never accepted because I wore
   a tie. The real people wanted no part of me.

   I did some drinking there on the night I left for San Juan. Phil Rollins,
   who'd worked with me, was paying for the ale, and I was swilling it down,
   trying to get drunk enough to sleep on the plane. Art Millick, the most
   vicious cab driver in New York, was there. So was Duke Peterson, who had
   just come back from the Virgin Islands. I recall Peterson giving me a list
   of people to look up when I got to St. Thomas, but I lost the list and
   never met any of them.

   It was a rotten night in the middle of January, but I wore a light cord
   coat. Everyone else had on heavy jackets and flannel suits. The last thing
   I remember is standing on the dirty bricks of Hudson Street, shaking hands
   with Rollins and cursing the freezing wind that blew in off the river.
   Then I got in Millick's cab and slept all the way to the airport.

   I was late and there was a line at the reservations desk. I fell in behind
   fifteen or so Puerto Ricans and one small blonde girl a few places ahead
   of me. I pegged her for a tourist, a wild young secretary going down to
   the Caribbean for a two week romp. She had a fine little body and an
   impatient way of standing that indicated a mass of stored-up energy. I
   watched her intently, smiling, feeling the ale in my veins, waiting for
   her to turn around for a swift contact with the eyes.

   She got her ticket and walked away toward the plane. There were still
   three Puerto Ricans in front of me. Two of them did their business and
   passed on, but the third was stymied by the clerk's refusal to let him
   carry a huge cardboard box on the plane as hand baggage. I gritted my
   teeth as they argued.

   Finally I broke in. "Hey!" I shouted. "What the hell is this? I have to
   get on that plane!"

   The clerk looked up, disregarding the shouts of the little man in front of
   me. "What's your name?"

   I told him, got my ticket, and bolted for the gate. When I got to the
   plane I had to shove past five or six people waiting to board. I showed my
   ticket to the grumbling stewardess and stepped inside to scan the seats on
   both sides of the aisle.

   Not a blonde head anywhere. I hurried up to the front, thinking that she
   might be so small that her head wouldn't show over the back seat. But she
   wasn't on the plane and by this time there were only two double seats left
   I fell into one on the aisle and put my typewriter on the one next to the
   window. They were starting the engines when I looked out and saw her
   coming across the runway, waving at the stewardess who was about to close
   the door.

   "Wait a minute!" I shouted. "Another passenger!" I watched until she
   reached the bottom of the steps. Then I turned around to smile as she came
   on. I was reaching for my typewriter, thinking to put it on the floor,
   when an old man shoved in front of me and sat down in the seat I was
   saving.

   "This seat's taken," I said quickly, grabbing him by the arm. He jerked
   away and snarled something in Spanish, turning his head toward the window.

   I grabbed him again. "Get up," I said angrily. He started to yell just as
   the girl went by and stopped a few feet up the aisle, looking around for a
   seat. "Here's one," I said, giving the old man a savage jerk. Before she
   could turn around the stewardess was on me, pulling at my arm.

   "He sat on my typewriter," I explained, helplessly watching the girl find
   a seat far up at the front of the plane.

   The stewardess patted the old man's shoulder and eased him back to the
   seat. "What kind of a bully are you?" she asked me. "I should put you
   off!"

   I grumbled and slumped back in the seat. The old man stared straight ahead
   until we got off the ground. "You rotten old bastard," I mumbled at him.

   He didn't even blink, and finally I shut my eyes and tried to sleep. Now
   and then I would glance up at the blonde head at the front of the plane.
   Then they turned out the lights and I couldn't see anything.

   It was dawn when I woke up. The old man was still asleep and I leaned
   across him to look out the window. Several thousand feet below us the
   ocean was dark blue and calm as a lake. Up ahead I saw an island, bright
   green in the early morning sun. There were beaches along the edge of it,
   and brown swamps further inland. The plane started down and the stewardess
   announced that we should all buckle our safety belts.

   Moments later we swept in over acres of palm trees and taxied to a halt in
   front of the big terminal. I decided to stay in my seat until the girl
   came past, then get up and walk with her across the runway. Since we were
   the only white people on the plane, it would seem quite natural.

   The others were standing now, laughing and jabbering as they waited for
   the stewardess to open the door. Suddenly the old man jumped up and tried
   to scramble over me like a dog. Without thinking, I slammed him back
   against the window, causing a thump that silenced the crowd. The man
   appeared to be sick and tried to scramble past me again, shouting
   hysterically in Spanish.

   "You crazy old bastard!" I yelled, shoving him back with one hand and
   reaching for my typewriter with the other. The door was open now and they
   were filing out The girl came past me and I tried to smile at her, keeping
   the old man pinned against the window until I could back into the aisle.
   He was raising so much hell, shouting and waving his arms, that I was
   tempted to belt him in the throat to calm him down.

   Then the stewardess arrived, followed by the co-pilot, who demanded to
   know what I thought I was doing.

   "He's been beating that old man ever since we left New York," said the
   stewardess. "He must be a sadist."

   They kept me there for ten minutes and at first I thought they meant to
   have me arrested. I tried to explain, but I was so tired and confused that
   I couldn't think what I was saying. When they finally let me go I slunk
   off the plane like a criminal, squinting and sweating in the sun as I
   crossed the runway to the baggage room.

   It was crowded with Puerto Ricans and the girl was nowhere in sight. There
   was not much hope of finding her now and I was not optimistic about what
   might happen if I did. Few girls look with favor on a man of my stripe, a
   brutalizer of old people. I remembered the expression on her face when she
   saw me with the old man pinned against the window. It was almost too much
   to overcome. I decided to get some breakfast and pick up my baggage later
   on.

   The airport in San Juan is a fine, modern thing, full of bright colors and
   suntanned people and Latin rhythms blaring from speakers hung on naked
   girders above the lobby. I walked up a long ramp, carrying my topcoat and
   my typewriter in one hand, and a small leather bag in the other. The signs
   led me up another ramp and finally to the coffee shop. As I went in I saw
   myself in a mirror, looking dirty and disreputable, a pale vagrant with
   red eyes.

   On top of my slovenly appearance, I stank of ale. It hung in my stomach
   like a lump of rancid milk. I tried not to breathe on anyone as I sat down
   at the counter and ordered sliced pineapple.

   Outside, the runway glistened in the early sun. Beyond it a thick palm
   jungle stood between me and the ocean. Several miles out at sea a sailboat
   moved slowly across the horizon. I stared for several moments and fell
   into a trance. It looked peaceful out there, peaceful and hot. I wanted to
   go into the palms and sleep, take a few chunks of pineapple and wander
   into the jungle to pass out.

   Instead, I ordered more coffee and looked again at the cable that had come
   with my plane ticket. It said I had reservations at the Condado Beach
   Hotel.

   It was not yet seven o'clock, but the coffee shop was crowded.

   Groups of men sat at tables beside the long window, sipping a milky brew
   and talking energetically. A few wore suits, but most of them had on what
   appeared to be the uniform of the day -- thick-rimmed sunglasses, shiny
   dark pants and white shirts with short sleeves and ties.

   I caught snatches of conversation here and there: ". . . no such thing as
   cheap beach-front anymore . . . yeah, but this ain't Montego, gentlemen .
   . . don't worry, he has plenty, and all we need is . . . sewed up, but we
   gotta move quick before Castro and that crowd jumps in with . . ."

   After ten minutes of half-hearted listening I suspected I was in a den of
   hustlers. Most of them seemed to be waiting for the seven-thirty flight
   from Miami, which -- from what I gathered of the conversations -- would be
   bulging at the seams with architects, strip-men, consultants and Sicilians
   fleeing Cuba.

   Their voices set my teeth on edge. I have no valid complaint against
   hustlers, no rational bitch, but the act of selling is repulsive to me. I
   harbor a secret urge to whack a salesman in the face, crack his teeth and
   put red bumps around his eyes.

   Once I was conscious of the talk I couldn't hear anything else. It
   shattered my feeling of laziness and finally annoyed me so much that I
   sucked down the rest of my coffee and hurried out of the place.

   The baggage room was empty. I found my two duffel bags and had a porter
   carry them out to the cab. All the way through the lobby he favored me
   with a steady grin and kept saying: "Si, Puerto Rico esta bueno . . . ah,
   si, muy bueno . . . mucho ha-ha, si. . ."

   In the cab I leaned back and lit a small cigar I'd bought in the coffee
   shop. I was feeling better now, warm and sleepy and absolutely free. With
   the palms zipping past and the big sun burning down on the road ahead, I
   had a flash of something I hadn't felt since my first months in Europe --
   a mixture of ignorance and a loose, "what the hell" kind of confidence
   that comes on a man when the wind picks up and he begins to move in a hard
   straight line toward an unknown horizon.

   We were speeding along a four-lane highway. Stretching off on both sides
   was a vast complex of yellow housing developments, laced with tall cyclone
   fences. Moments later we passed what looked like a new subdivision, full
   of identical pink and blue houses. There was a billboard at the entrance,
   announcing to all travelers that they were passing the El Jippo
   Urbanization. A few yards from the billboard was a tiny shack made of palm
   fronds and tin scraps, and beside it was a hand-painted sign saying "Coco
   Frio." Inside, a boy of about thirteen leaned on his counter and stared
   out at the passing cars.

   Arriving half-drunk in a foreign place is hard on the nerves. You have a
   feeling that something is wrong, that you can't get a grip. I had this
   feeling, and when I got to the hotel I went straight to bed. It was
   four-thirty when I woke up, hungry and dirty and not at all sure where I
   was. I walked out on my balcony and stared down at the beach. Below me, a
   crowd of women, children and potbellied men were splashing around in the
   surf. To my right was another hotel, and then another, each with its own
   crowded beach.

   I took a shower, then went downstairs to the open-air lobby. The
   restaurant was closed, so I tried the bar. It showed every sign of having
   been flown down intact from a Catskill mountain resort I sat there for two
   hours, drinking, eating peanuts and staring out at the ocean. There were
   roughly a dozen people in the place. The men looked like sick Mexicans,
   with thin little mustaches and silk suits that glistened like plastic.
   Most of the women were Americans, a brittle-looking lot, none of them
   young, all wearing sleeveless cocktail dresses that fit like rubber sacks.

   I felt like something that had washed up on the beach. My wrinkled cord
   coat was five years old and frayed at the neck, my pants had no creases
   and, although it had never occurred to me to wear a tie, I was obviously
   out of place without one. Rather than seem like a pretender, I gave up on
   rum and ordered a beer. The bartender eyed me sullenly and I knew the
   reason why -- I was wearing nothing that glistened. No doubt it was the
   mark of a bad apple. In order to make a go of it here, I would have to get
   some dazzling clothes.

   At six-thirty I left the bar and walked outside. It was getting dark and
   the big Avenida looked cool and graceful. On the other side were homes
   that once looked out on the beach. Now they looked out on hotels and most
   of them had retreated behind tall hedges and walls that cut them off from
   the street. Here and there I could see a patio or a screen porch where
   people sat beneath fans and drank rum. Somewhere up the street I heard
   bells, the sleepy tinkling of Brahms' Lullaby.

   I walked a block or so, trying to get the feel of the place, and the bells
   kept coming closer. Soon an ice-cream truck appeared, moving slowly down
   the middle of the street. On its roof was a giant popsicle, flashing on
   and off with red neon explosions that lit up the whole area. From
   somewhere in its bowels came the clanging of Mr. Brahms' tune. As it
   passed me, the driver grinned happily and blew his horn.

   I immediately hailed a cab, telling the man to take me to the middle of
   town. Old San Juan is an island, connected to the mainland by several
   causeways. We crossed on the one that comes in from Condado. Dozens of
   Puerto Ricans stood along the rails, fishing in the shallow lagoon, and
   off to my right was a huge white shape beneath a neon sign that said
   Caribe Hilton. This, I knew, was the cornerstone of The Boom. Conrad had
   come in like Jesus and all the fish had followed. Before Hilton there was
   nothing; now the sky was the limit. We passed a deserted stadium and soon
   we were on a boulevard that ran along a cliff. On one side was the dark
   Atlantic, and, on the other, across the narrow city, were thousands of
   colored lights on cruise ships tied up at the waterfront. We turned off
   the boulevard and stopped at a place the driver said was Plaza Colon. The
   fare was a dollar-thirty and I gave him two bills.

   He looked at the money and shook his head.

   "What's wrong?" I said.

   He shrugged. "No change, senor."

   I felt in my pocket -- nothing but a nickel. I knew he was lying, but I
   didn't feel like taking the trouble to get a dollar changed. "You goddamn
   thief," I said, tossing the bills in his lap. He shrugged again and drove
   off.

   The Plaza Colon was a hub for several narrow streets. The buildings were
   jammed together, two and three stories high, with balconies that hung out
   over the street. The air was hot, and a smell of sweat and garbage rode on
   the faint breeze. A chatter of music and voices came from open windows.
   The sidewalks were so narrow that it was an effort to stay out of the
   gutter, and fruit vendors blocked the streets with wooden carts, selling
   peeled oranges for a nickel each.

   I walked for thirty minutes, looking into windows of stores that sold "Ivy
   Liga" clothes, peering into foul bars full of whores and sailors, dodging
   people on the sidewalks, thinking I would collapse at any moment if I
   didn't find a restaurant.

   Finally I gave up. There seemed to be no restaurants in the Old City. The
   only thing I saw was called the New York Diner, and it was closed. In
   desperation, I hailed a cab and told him to take me to the Daily News.

   He stared at me.

   "The newspaper!" I shouted, slamming the door as I got in.

   "Ah, si," he murmured. "El Diario, si."

   "No, goddamnit," I said. The Daily News -- the American newspaper -- El
   News."

   He had never heard of it, so we drove back to Plaza Colon, where I leaned
   out the window and asked a cop. He didn't know either, but finally a man
   came over from the bus stop and told us where it was.

   We drove down a cobblestone hill toward the waterfront. There was no sign
   of a newspaper, and I suspected he was bringing me down here to get rid of
   me. We turned a corner and he suddenly hit his brakes. Just ahead of us
   was some kind of a gang-fight, a shouting mob, trying to enter an old
   greenish building that looked like a warehouse.

   "Go on," I said to the driver. "We can get by."

   He mumbled and shook his head.

   I banged my fist on the back of the seat "Get going! No move-- no pay."

   He mumbled again, but shifted into first and angled toward the far side of
   the street, putting as much distance as possible between us and the fight.
   He stopped as we came abreast of the building and I saw that it was a gang
   of about twenty Puerto Ricans, attacking a tall American in a tan suit. He
   was standing on the steps, swinging a big wooden sign like a baseball bat

   "You rotten little punks!" he yelled. There was a flurry of movement and I
   heard the sound of mumping and shouting. One of the attackers fell down in
   the street with blood on his face. The large fellow backed toward the
   door, waving the sign in front of him. Two men tried to grab it and he
   whacked one of them in the chest, knocking him down the steps. The others
   stood away, yelling and shaking their fists. He snarled back at them:
   "Here it is, punks -- come get it!"

   Nobody moved. He waited a moment, then lifted the sign over his shoulder
   and threw it into their midst. It hit one man in the stomach, driving him
   back on the others. I heard a burst of laughter, then he disappeared into
   the building.

   "Okay," I said, turning back to the driver. "That's it -- let's go."

   He shook his head and pointed at the building, then at me. "Si, esta
   News." He nodded, then pointed again at the building. "Si," he said
   gravely.

   It dawned on me that we were sitting in front of the Daily News -- my new
   home. I took one look at the dirty mob between me and the door, and
   decided to go back to the hotel. Just then I heard another commotion. A
   Volkswagen pulled up behind us and three cops got out, waving long
   billyclubs and yelling in Spanish. Some of the mob ran, but others stayed
   to argue. I watched for a moment, then gave the driver a dollar and ran
   into the building.

   A sign said the News editorial office was on the second floor. I took an
   elevator, half expecting to find myself lifted into the midst of more
   violence. But the door opened on a dark hall, and a little to my left I
   heard the noise of the city room.

   The moment I got inside I felt better. There was a friendly messiness
   about the place, a steady clatter of typewriters and wire machines, even
   the smell was familiar. The room was so big that it looked empty, although
   I could see at least ten people. The only one not working was a small,
   black-haired man at a desk beside the door. He was tilted back in a chair,
   staring at the ceiling.

   I walked over and as I started to speak he jerked around in the chair.
   "All right!" he snapped. "What the fuck are you after?"

   I glared down at him. "I start work here tomorrow," I said. "My name's
   Kemp, Paul Kemp."

   He smiled faintly. "Sorry -- thought you were after my film."

   "What?" I said.

   He grumbled something about being "robbed blind," and "watching it like a
   hawk."

   I glanced around the room. "They look normal."

   He snorted. "Thieves -- packrats." He stood up and held out his hand. "Bob
   Sala, staff photographer," he said. "What brings you in tonight?"

   "I'm looking for a place to eat."

   He smiled. "You broke?"

   "No, I'm rich -- I just can't find a restaurant"

   He dropped back in his chair. "You're lucky. The first thing you learn
   here is to avoid restaurants."

   "Why?" I said. "Dysentery?"

   He laughed. "Dysentery, crabs, gout, Hutchinson's Disease -- you can get
   anything here, anything at all." He looked at his watch. "Wait about ten
   minutes and I'll take you up to Al's."

   I moved a camera out of the way and sat down on his desk. He leaned back
   and stared again at the ceiling, scratching his wiry head from time to
   time and apparently drifting off to some happier land where there were
   good restaurants and no thieves. He looked out of place here -- more like
   a ticket-taker at some Indiana carnival. His teeth were bad, he needed a
   shave, his shirt was filthy, and his shoes looked like they'd come from
   the Goodwill.

   We sat there in silence until two men came out of an office on the other
   side of the room. One was the tall American I'd seen fighting in the
   street. The other was short and bald, talking excitedly and gesturing with
   both hands.

   "Who's that?" I asked Sala, pointing at the tall one.

   He looked. "The guy with Lotterman?"

   I nodded, presuming the short one to be Lotterman.

   "His name's Yeamon," said Sala, turning back to the desk. "He's new -- got
   here a few weeks ago."

   "I saw him fighting outside," I said. "A bunch of Puerto Ricans jumped him
   right in front of the building."

   Sala shook his head. "That figures -- he's a nut" He nodded. "Probably
   mouthed off at those union goons. It's some kind of a wildcat strike --
   nobody knows what it means."

   Just then Lotterman called across the room: "What are you doing, Sala?"

   Sala didn't look up. "Nothing -- I'm off in three minutes."

   "Who's that with you?" Lotterman asked, eyeing me suspiciously.

   "Judge Crater," Sala replied. "Might be a story."

   "Judge who?" said Lotterman, advancing on the desk.

   "Never mind," said Sala. "His name is Kemp and he claims you hired him."

   Lotterman looked puzzled. "Judge Kemp?" he muttered. Then he smiled
   broadly and held out both hands. "Oh yes -- Kemp! Good to see you, boy.
   When did you get in?"

   "This morning," I said, getting off the desk to shake hands. "I slept most
   of the day."

   "Good!" he said. "That's very smart." He nodded emphatically. "Well, I
   hope you're ready to go."

   "Not right now," I said. "I have to eat."

   He laughed. "Oh no -- tomorrow. I wouldn't put you to work tonight." He
   laughed again. "No, I want you boys to eat." He smiled down at Sala. "I
   suppose Bob's going to show you the town, eh?"

   "Sure I am," said Sala. "Do it on the old expense account, eh?" Lotterman
   laughed nervously. "You know what I mean, Bob -- let's try to be civil."
   He turned and waved at Yeamon, who was standing in the middle of the room,
   examining a rip in the armpit of his coat

   Yeamon came toward us with a long bow-legged stride, smiling politely when
   Lotterman introduced me. He was tall, with a face that was either arrogant
   or something else that I couldn't quite place.

   Lotterman rubbed his hands together. "Yessir, Bob," he said with a grin.
   "We're getting a real team together, eh?" He slapped Yeamon on the back.
   "Old Yeamon just had a scrape with those communist bastards outside," he
   said. "They're savage -- they should be locked up."

   Sala nodded. "They'll kill one of us pretty soon."

   "Don't say that, Bob," said Lotterman. "Nobody's going to be killed."

   Sala shrugged.

   "I called Commissioner Rogan about it this morning," Lotterman explained.
   "We can't tolerate this sort of thing -- it's a menace."

   "Damn right it is," Sala replied. "To hell with Commissioner Rogan -- we
   need a few Lugers." He stood up and pulled his coat off the back of the
   chair. "Well, time to go." He looked at Yeamon. "We're going up to Al's --
   you hungry?"

   "I'll be up later on," Yeamon replied. "I want to check by the apartment
   and see if Chenault's still asleep."

   "Okay," said Sala. He waved me toward the door. "Come on. We'll go out the
   back way -- I don't feel like a fight."

   "Be careful, boys," Lotterman called after us. I nodded and followed Sala
   into the hall. At the rear of the building a stairway led down to a metal
   door. Sala poked at it with a pocket knife and it swung open. "Can't do it
   from outside," he explained as I followed him into the alley.

   His car was a tiny Fiat convertible, half eaten away by rust. It wouldn't
   start and I had to get out and push. Finally it kicked over and I jumped
   in. The engine roared painfully as we started up the hill. I didn't think
   we'd make it, but the little car staggered manfully over the crest and
   started up another steep hill. Sala seemed unconcerned with the strain,
   riding the clutch whenever we threatened to stall.

   We parked in front of Al's and went back to the patio. "I'm getting three
   hamburgers," said Sala. "That's all he serves."

   I nodded. "Anything -- I need bulk."

   He called to the cook and told him we wanted six hamburgers. "And two
   beers," he added. "Real quick."

   "I'll have rum," I said.

   "Two beers and two rums," Sala shouted. Then he leaned back in his chair
   and lit a cigarette. "You a reporter?"

   "Yeah," I said.

   "What brings you down here?"

   "Why not?" I replied. "A man could do worse than the Caribbean."

   He grunted. "This isn't the Caribbean -- you should have kept on going
   south."

   The cook shuffled across the patio with our drinks. "Where were you before
   this?" Sala asked, lifting his beers off the tray.

   "New York," I said. "Before that, Europe."

   "Where in Europe?"

   "All over -- mainly Rome and London."

   "Daily American!" he asked.

   "Yeah," I said. "I had a fill-in job for six months."

   "You know a guy named Fred Ballinger?" he asked.

   I nodded.

   "He's here," Sala said. "He's getting rich."

   I groaned. "Man, what a jackass."

   "You'll see him," he said with a grin. "He hangs around the office."

   "What the hell for?" I snapped.

   "Sucks up to Donovan." He laughed. "Claims he was sports editor of the
   Daily American."

   "He was a pimp!" I said.

   Sala laughed. "Donovan threw him down the stairs one night -- he hasn't
   been around for a while."

   "Good," I said. "Who's Donovan -- the sports editor?"

   He nodded. "A drunkard -- he's about to quit"

   "Why?"

   He laughed. "Everybody quits -- you'll quit. Nobody worth a shit can work
   here." He shook his head. "People dropping out like flies. I've been here
   longer than anybody -- except Tyrrell, the city editor, and he's going
   soon. Lotterman doesn't know it yet -- that'll be it -- Tyrrell's the only
   good head left." He laughed quickly. "Wait till you meet the managing
   editor -- can't even write a headline."

   "Who's that?" I said.

   "Segarra -- Greasy Nick. He's writing the governor's biography. Any time
   of the day or night he's writing the governor's biography -- can't be
   disturbed."

   I sipped my drink. "How long have you been here?" I asked him.

   "Too long, more than a year."

   "Couldn't be too bad," I said.

   He smiled. "Hell, don't let me throw you off. You may like it -- there's a
   type that does."

   "What type is that?" I asked.

   "Bagmasters," he replied. "The wheelers and the dealers -- they love it
   here."

   "Yeah," I said. "I got that feeling at the airport." I looked over at him.
   "What keeps you here? It's only forty-five dollars to New York."

   He snorted. "Hell, I make that much in an hour -- just for punching a
   button."

   "You sound greedy," I said.

   He grinned. "I am. There's nobody on the island greedier than me.
   Sometimes I feel like kicking myself in the balls."

   Sweep arrived with our hamburgers. Sala grabbed his off the tray and
   opened them up on the table, throwing the lettuce and tomato slices into
   the ashtray. "You brainless monster," he said wearily. "How many times
   have I told you to keep this garbage off my meat?"

   The waiter stared down at the garbage.

   "A thousand times!" Sala shouted. "I tell you every stinking day!"

   "Man," I said with a smile. "You should leave -- this place is getting to
   you."

   He gobbled one of his hamburgers. "You'll see," he muttered. "You and
   Yeamon -- that guy's a freak. He won't last. None of us will last." He
   slammed his fist on the table. "Sweep -- more beer!"

   The waiter came out of the kitchen and looked at us. "Two beers!" Sala
   yelled. "Hurry!"

   I smiled and leaned back in the chair. "What's wrong with Yeamon?"

   He looked at me as if it were incredible that I should have to ask.
   "Didn't you see him?" he said. "That wild-eyed sonofabitch! Lotterman's
   scared shitless of him -- couldn't you see it?"

   I shook my head. "He looked okay to me."

   "Okay?" he shouted. "You should have been here a few nights ago! He
   flipped this table for no reason at all -- this very table." He slapped
   our table with his palm. "No damn reason," he repeated. "Knocked all our
   drinks in the dirt and flipped the table on some poor bastard who didn't
   know what he was saying -- then threatened to stomp him!" Sala shook his
   head. "I don't know where Lotterman found that guy. He's so scared of him
   that he lent him a hundred dollars and Yeamon went out and blew it on a
   motorscooter." He laughed bitterly. "Now he's brought some girl down here
   to live with him."

   The waiter appeared with the beers and Sala snatched them off the tray.
   "No girl with any brains would come here," he said. "Just virgins --
   hysterical virgins." He shook his finger at me. "You'll turn queer in this
   place, Kemp -- mark my words. This place will turn a man queer and crazy."

   "I don't know," I said. "A fine young thing came down on the plane with
   me." I smiled. "I think I'll look around for her tomorrow. She's bound to
   be on the beach somewhere."

   "She's probably a lesbian," he replied. "This place is full of them." He
   shook his head. "It's the tropic rot -- this constant sexless drinking!"
   He slumped back in his chair. "It's driving me wild -- I'm cracking up!"

   Sweep came hurrying out with two more beers and Sala grabbed them off the
   tray. Just then Yeamon appeared in the doorway; he saw us and came over to
   the table.

   Sala groaned miserably. "Oh god, here he is," he muttered. "Don't stomp
   me, Yeamon -- I didn't mean it."

   Yeamon smiled and sat down. "Are you still bitching about Moberg?" He
   laughed and turned to me. "Robert thinks I mistreated Moberg."

   Sala grumbled something about "nuts."

   Yeamon laughed again. "Sala's the oldest man in San Juan. How old are you,
   Robert -- about ninety?"

   "Don't give me your crazy shit!" Sala shouted, springing up from his
   chair.

   Yeamon nodded. "Robert needs a woman," he said gently. "His penis is
   pressing on his brain and he can't think."

   Sala groaned and shut his eyes.

   Yeamon tapped on the table. "Robert, the streets are full of whores. You
   should look around sometime. I saw so many on the way up here that I
   wanted to grab about six and fall down naked and let them crawl all over
   me like puppies." He laughed and signaled for the waiter.

   "You bastard," Sala muttered. "That girl hasn't been here a day and you're
   already talking about having whores crawl on you." He nodded wisely.
   "You'll get the syphilis -- you keep on whoring and stomping around and
   pretty soon you'll stomp in shit."

   Yeamon grinned. "Okay, Robert. You've warned me."

   Sala looked up. "Is she still asleep? How long before I can go back to my
   own apartment?"

   "Soon as we leave here," Yeamon replied. "I'll take her on out to the
   house." He nodded. "Of course I'll have to borrow your car -- too much
   luggage for the scooter."

   "Jesus," Sala muttered. "You're a plague, Yeamon -- you'll suck me dry."

   Yeamon laughed. "You're a fine Christian, Robert. You'll get your reward."
   He ignored Sala's snort and turned to me. "Did you come in on the morning
   plane?"

   "Yeah," I said.

   He smiled. "Chenault said there was some young guy beating up an old man
   on the plane with her -- was that you?"

   I groaned, feeling the web of sin and circumstance close down on the
   table. Sala eyed me suspiciously.

   I explained that I'd been sitting next to an aged lunatic who kept trying
   to crawl over me.

   Yeamon laughed. "Chenault thought you were the lunatic -- claimed you kept
   staring at her, then ran amok on the old man -- you were still beating him
   when she got off the plane."

   "Jesus Christ!" Sala exclaimed, giving me a disgusted look.

   I shook my head and tried to laugh it off. The implications were ugly -- a
   crazed masher and a slugger of old men -- not the kind of introduction a
   man wants to make for himself on a new job.

   Yeamon seemed amused, but Sala was plainly leery. I called for more drinks
   and quickly changed the subject.

   We sat there for several hours, talking, drinking lazily, killing the time
   while a sad piano tinkled away inside. The notes floated out to the patio,
   giving the night a hopeless, melancholy tone that was almost pleasant.

   Sala was sure the paper was going to fold. "I'll ride it out," he assured
   us. "Give it another month." He had two more big photo assignments and
   then he was off, probably to Mexico City. "Yeah," he said, "figure about a
   month, then we start packing."

   Yeamon shook his head. "Robert wants the paper to fold so he'll have an
   excuse to leave." He smiled. "It'll last a while. All I need is about
   three months --enough money to take off down the islands."

   "Where?" I asked.

   He shrugged. "Anywhere -- find a good island, someplace cheap."

   Sala hissed. "You talk like a caveman, Yeamon. What you need is a good job
   in Chicago."

   Yeamon laughed. "You'll feel better when you get humped, Robert."

   Sala grumbled and drank his beer. I liked him, in spite of his bitching. I
   guessed he was a few years older than I was, maybe thirty-two or -three,
   but there was something about him that made me feel like I'd known him a
   long time.

   Yeamon was familiar too, but not quite as close -- more like a memory of
   somebody I'd known in some other place and then lost track of. He was
   probably twenty-four or -five and he reminded me vaguely of myself at that
   age -- not exactly the way I was, but the way I might have seen myself if
   I'd stopped to think about it. Listening to him, I realized how long it
   had been since I'd felt like I had the world by the balls, how many quick
   birthdays had gone by since that first year in Europe when I was so
   ignorant and so confident that every splinter of luck made me feel like a
   roaring champion.

   I hadn't felt that way in a long time. Perhaps, in the ambush of those
   years, the idea that I was a champion had been shot out from under me. But
   I remembered it now and it made me feel old and slightly nervous that I
   had done so little in so long a time.

   I leaned back in the chair and sipped my drink. The cook was banging
   around in the kitchen and for some reason the piano had stopped. From
   inside came a babble of Spanish, an incoherent background for my scrambled
   thoughts. For the first time I felt the foreignness of the place, the real
   distance I had put between me and my last foothold. There was no reason to
   feel pressure, but I felt it anyway -- the pressure of hot air and passing
   time, an idle tension that builds up in places where men sweat twenty-four
   hours a day.

   Two

   I got up early the next morning and went for a swim. The sun was hot and I
   squatted on the beach for several hours, hoping no one would notice my
   sickly New York pallor.

   At eleven-thirty I caught a bus in front of the hotel. It was crowded and
   I had to stand. The air in the bus was like steam, but no one else seemed
   to mind. Every window was closed, the smell was unbearable, and by the
   time we got to the Plaza Colon I was dizzy and soaked with sweat.

   As I came down the hill to the News building I saw the mob. Some of them
   carried big signs and others sat on the curbing or leaned against parked
   cars, shouting from time to time at anyone going in or out. I tried to
   ignore them, but one man came after me yelling in Spanish and shaking his
   fist as I hurried into the elevator. I tried to catch him in the door, but
   he jumped away as it closed.

   As I crossed the hall to the newsroom I heard someone yelling inside. When
   I opened the door I saw Lotterman standing in the middle of the room,
   waving a copy of El Diario. He pointed at a small blond man: "Moberg! You
   drunken bastard! Your days are numbered! If anything goes wrong with that
   wire machine I'll have it repaired out of your severance check!"

   Moberg said nothing. He looked sick enough to be in a hospital. I later
   learned that he'd come into the newsroom at midnight, raving drunk, and
   pissed on the teletype machine. On top of that, we'd been scooped on a
   waterfront stabbing and Moberg had the police beat. Lotterman cursed him
   again, then turned on Sala, who had just come in. "Where were you last
   night, Sala? Why don't we have any pictures of this stabbing?"

   Sala looked surprised. "What the hell? I finished at eight -- you expect
   me to work twenty-four hours a day?"

   Lotterman mumbled and turned away. Then he caught sight of me and waved me
   into his office.

   "Jesus!" he exclaimed as he sat down. "What's wrong with these bums --
   sneaking out of the office, pissing on expensive equipment, drunk all the
   time -- it's a wonder I'm not crazy!"

   I smiled and lit a cigarette.

   He looked at me curiously. "I hope to Christ you're a normal human being
   -- one more pervert around here will be the last straw."

   "Pervert?" I said.

   "Ah, you know what I mean," he said with a wave of his hand. "General
   perverts -- drunks, bums, thieves -- god only knows where they come from.

   "Not worth a pound of piss!" he exclaimed. "Sneak around here like
   weasels, give me the big smile, then disappear without a goddamn word to
   anybody." He shook his head sadly. "How can I put out a paper with nothing
   but wineheads?"

   "Sounds bad," I said.

   "It is," he muttered, "believe me, it is." Then he looked up. "I want you
   to get acquainted as fast as you can. When we finish here, you go back to
   the library and dig into the back issues -- take some notes, find out
   what's going on." He nodded. "Later on you can sit down with Segarra, our
   managing editor. I told him to give you a briefing."

   We talked a while longer and I mentioned that I'd heard a rumor that the
   paper might fold.

   He looked alarmed. "You got that from Sala, didn't you? Well don't pay any
   attention to him -- he's crazy!"

   I smiled. "Okay -- just thought I should ask."

   "Too many crazy ones around here," he snapped. "We need some sanity."

   On my way back to the library I wondered how long I would last in San Juan
   -- how long before I'd be labeled a "weasel" or a "pervert," before I
   started kicking myself in the balls or got chopped up by nationalist
   thugs. I remembered Lotterman's voice when he'd called me in New York; the
   strange jerkiness and the odd phrasing. I had sensed it then, but now I
   knew. I could almost see him -- gripping the phone with both
   white-knuckled hands, trying to keep his voice steady while mobs gathered
   on his doorstep and drunken reporters pissed all over the office -- saying
   tensely: "Sure thing, Kemp, you sound normal enough, just come on down and
   --"

   And here I was, a new face in the snakepit, a pervert yet to be
   classified, sporting a paisley tie and a button-down shirt, no longer
   young but not quite over the hump -- a man on the brink, as it were,
   trotting back to the library to find out what was going on.

   I had been there about twenty minutes when a thin, handsome Puerto Rican
   came in and tapped me on the shoulder. "Kemp?" he said. "I'm Nick Segarra
   --you have a minute?"

   I got up and we shook hands. His eyes were tiny and his hair was combed so
   perfectly that I thought it might be a toupee. He looked like a man who
   might write the governor's biography -- also like a man who would be at
   the governor's cocktail parties.

   As we crossed the newsroom, heading for his desk in the corner, a man who
   looked like he'd just stepped out of a rum advertisement came through the
   door and waved at Segarra. He came toward us -- graceful, smiling, a solid
   American face, very much the embassy type with his deep tan and his grey
   linen suit.

   He greeted Segarra warmly and they shook hands. "A charming bunch out
   there in the street," he said. "One of them spit at me as I came in."

   Segarra shook his head. "It's terrible, terrible . . . Ed just keeps
   antagonizing them . . ." Then he looked over at me. "Paul Kemp," he said.
   "Hal Sanderson."

   We shook hands. Sanderson had a firm, practiced grip and I had a feeling
   that somewhere in his youth he'd been told that a man was measured by the
   strength of his handshake. He smiled, then looked at Segarra. "You have
   time for a drink? I'm on to something that might interest you."

   Segarra looked at his watch. "You bet. I was about ready to leave anyway."
   He turned to me. "We'll talk tomorrow -- okay?"

   As I turned to go, Sanderson called after me. "Good to have you with us,
   Paul. One of these days we'll have lunch."

   "Sure," I said.

   I spent the rest of the day in the library, and left at eight. On my way
   out of the building I met Sala coming in. "What are you doing tonight?" he
   asked.

   "Nothing," I said.

   He looked pleased. "Good. I have to get some pictures at the casinos --
   want to come along?"

   "I guess so," I said. "Can I go like this?"

   "Hell yes," he said with a grin. "All you need is a tie."

   "Okay," I said. "I'm on my way up to Al's -- come on up when you finish."

   He nodded. "I'll be about thirty minutes. I have to get this film
   developed."

   The night was hot and the waterfront was alive with rats. Several blocks
   away a big cruise ship was tied up. Thousands of lights glittered on the
   deck and music came from somewhere inside. At the bottom of the gangplank
   was a group of what appeared to be American businessmen and their wives. I
   passed on the other side of the street, but the air was so still that I
   could hear them plainly -- happy half-tight voices from somewhere in the
   middle of America, some flat little town where they spent fifty weeks of
   every year. I stopped and listened, standing in the shadows of an ancient
   warehouse and feeling like a man with no country at all. They couldn't see
   me and I watched for several minutes, hearing those voices from Illinois
   or Missouri or Kansas and knowing them all too well. Then I moved on,
   still in the shadows as I turned up the hill toward Calle O'Leary.

   The block in front of Al's was full of people: old men sitting on steps,
   women moving in and out of doorways, children chasing each other on the
   narrow sidewalks, music from open windows, voices murmuring in Spanish,
   the tinkle of Brahms' Lullaby from an ice-cream truck, and a dim light
   above Al's door.

   I went through to the patio, stopping on the way to order hamburgers and
   beer. Yeamon was there, sitting alone at the rear table, staring at
   something he had written in a notebook.

   "What's that?" I said, sitting down across from him.

   He looked up, shoving the notebook aside. "Ah, it's that goddamn migrant
   story," he said wearily. "It's supposed to be in on Monday and I haven't
   even started."

   "Something big?" I asked.

   He looked down at the notebook. "Well. . . maybe too big for a newspaper."
   He looked up. "You know -- why do Puerto Ricans leave Puerto Rico?" He
   shook his head. "I kept putting it off all week, and now with Chenault
   here I can't get a damn thing done at home. . . I'm feeling a little
   pressed."

   "Where do you live?" I asked.

   He smiled broadly. "Man, you should see it -- right on the beach, about
   twenty miles out of town. It's too much. You really have to see it."

   "Sounds good," I said. "I'd like to get something like that."

   "You need a car," he said, "or something like I have -- a scooter."

   I nodded. "Yeah, I'll start looking around on Monday."

   Sala arrived just as Sweep came out with my hamburgers. "Three of those
   for me," Sala snapped. "Quick as you can -- I'm in a hurry."

   "You still working?" Yeamon asked.

   Sala nodded. "Not for Lotterman -- this one's for old Bob." He lit a
   cigarette. "My agent wants some casino shots. They're hard to come by."

   "Why?" I asked.

   "Illegal," he said. "When I first got here they caught me shooting at the
   Caribe -- I had to go see Commissioner Rogan." He laughed. "He asked me
   how I'd feel if I took a shot of some poor bastard at the roulette wheel
   and it happened to appear in his hometown paper just about the time he
   applied for a bank loan." He laughed again. "I told him I couldn't care
   less. I'm a photographer, not a goddamn social worker."

   "You're a terror," Yeamon said with a smile.

   "Yeah," Sala agreed. "They know me now -- so I have to work with this." He
   showed us a tiny camera no bigger than a cigarette lighter. "Me and Dick
   Tracy," he said with a grin. "I'll bust 'em all."

   Then he looked over at me. "Well, you got through the day -- any offers?"

   "Offers?"

   "Your first day on the job," he said. "Somebody's bound to have offered
   you a deal."

   "No," I said. "I met Segarra. . . and a guy named Sanderson. What does he
   do?"

   "He's a PR man. Works for Adelante."

   "The government?"

   "In a way," Sala said. "The people of Puerto Rico are paying Sanderson to
   tidy up their image in the States. Adelante is a big public relations
   outfit."

   "When did he work for Lotterman?" I asked. I had seen Sanderson's byline
   in some old issues of the News.

   "He was here from the beginning -- worked about a year, then hooked up
   with Adelante. Lotterman claims they stole him, but it was no loss. He's a
   phony, a real prick."

   "Is that Segarra's buddy?" Yeamon asked.

   "Yeah," Sala replied, absently tossing the lettuce and tomatoes off his
   hamburgers. He ate hurriedly and stood up. "Let's go," he said, looking at
   Yeamon. "Come on -- we may get some action."

   Yeamon shook his head. "I have to do this goddamn story, then drive all
   the way out to the house." He smiled. "I'm a family man now."

   We paid our bill and went out to Sala's car. The top was down and it was a
   fine, fast ride along the Boulevard to Condado. The wind was cool and the
   roar of the little engine bounced around in the trees above our heads as
   we swerved in and out of traffic.

   The Caribe casino was on the second floor, a big smoky place with dark
   drapes around the walls. Sala wanted to work alone, so we separated at the
   door.

   I stopped at the blackjack table, but everyone there seemed bored, so I
   moved on to the craps game. There was more noise here. A group of sailors
   were yelling around the table as the dice bounced on the green cloth and
   the croupiers raked chips back and forth like frantic gardeners. Scattered
   among the sailors were men in dinner jackets and silk suits. Most of them
   smoked cigars, and when they talked it was with the accent of Ne'Yak.
   Somewhere in the cloud of smoke behind me I heard a man introduced as the
   "biggest crook in New Jersey." I turned, slightly curious, and saw the
   crook smile modestly as the woman beside him burst into wild laughter.

   The roulette wheel was surrounded by low rollers, most of them much older
   than they wanted to look. The light in gambling rooms is not good for
   aging women. It catches every crease in their faces and every wart on
   their necks; drops of sweat between fallow breasts, hairs on a nipple
   momentarily exposed, a flabby arm or a sagging eye. I watched their faces,
   most of them red with new sunburns, as they stared at the bouncing ball
   and nervously fingered their chips.

   Then I walked back to a table where a young Puerto Rican in a white jacket
   was giving out free sandwiches. "The fat is in the fire," I said to him.

   "Si," he replied gravely.

   As I started back toward the roulette wheel I felt a hand on my arm.

   It was Sala. "Ready?" he said. "Let's move on."

   We drove up the street to the Condado Beach Hotel, but the casino was
   almost empty. "Nothing here," he said. "Let's go next door."

   Next door was La Concha. The casino here was more crowded, but the
   atmosphere was the same as the others -- a sort of dull frenzy, like
   taking a pep pill when what you really want to do is sleep.

   Somehow, I became involved with a woman who claimed to be from Trinidad.
   She had large breasts, a British accent, and wore a tight green dress. One
   moment I was standing next to her at the roulette wheel, and before I
   realized what was happening we were in the parking lot, waiting for Sala
   -- who, in the same weird way, had found himself with a girl who turned
   out to be a friend of my date.

   After much effort, we fitted ourselves in the car. Sala seemed agitated.
   "To hell with the rest of the shots," he said. "I'll get them tomorrow."
   He paused. "Well. . . what now?"

   The only place I knew was Al's, so I suggested we go there.

   Sala objected. "Those bums from the paper will be there," he said.
   "They're finishing up about now."

   There was a moment of silence -- then Lorraine leaned over the seat and
   suggested we go to the beach. "It's such a beautiful night," she said.
   "Let's just drive along the dunes."

   I couldn't help laughing. "Hell yes," I said. "Let's get some rum and
   drive on the dunes."

   Sala mumbled and started the car. A few blocks from the hotel we stopped
   at a bodega and he got out. "I'll get a bottle," he said. "They probably
   won't have any ice."

   "Don't worry about it," I said. "Just get some paper cups."

   Rather than drive all the way out to the airport, where Sala said the
   beaches would be deserted, he turned off near the edge of Condado and we
   stopped on a beach in front of the residential section.

   "We can't drive here," he said. "Why not go for a swim?"

   Lorraine agreed, but the other girl balked.

   "What the hell is wrong with you?" Sala demanded.

   She gave him a stony look and said nothing. Lorraine and I got out of the
   car, leaving Sala with his problem. We walked several hundred yards down
   the beach and I was curious. "You really want to go in?" I said finally.

   "Certainly," she replied, pulling her dress over her head. "I've wanted to
   do this all week. What an awful bore this place is -- we've done nothing
   but sit, sit, sit."

   I took off my clothes and watched her as she toyed with the idea of
   removing her underwear.

   "Might as well keep it dry," I said.

   She smiled, acknowledging my wisdom, then unhooked her bra and stepped out
   of her panties. We walked down to the water and waded in. It was warm and
   salty, but the breakers were so big that neither of us could stand up. For
   a moment I considered going out beyond them, but a look at that dark sea
   changed my mind. So we played in the surf for a while, letting ourselves
   be knocked around by the waves, and finally she struggled back to the
   beach, saying she was exhausted. I followed, offering her a cigarette as
   we sat down on the sand.

   We talked for a while, drying off as best we could, and suddenly she
   reached over and pulled me down on top of her. "Make love to me," she said
   urgently.

   I laughed and leaned down to bite her on the breast. She began to groan
   and jerk me around by the hair, and after a few minutes of this I lifted
   her onto the clothes so we wouldn't get full of sand. The smell of her
   body excited me tremendously and I got a savage grip on her buttocks,
   pounding her up and down. Suddenly she began to howl: at first I thought I
   was hurting her, then I realized she was having some sort of extreme
   orgasm. She had several of them, howling each time, before I felt the slow
   bursting of my own.

   We lay there for several hours, going at it again when we felt rested. All
   in all I don't think we said fifty words. She seemed to want nothing but
   the clutch and howl of the orgasm, the rolling grip of two bodies in the
   sand.

   I was stung at least a thousand times by mimis -- tiny bugs with the jolt
   of a sweat bee. I was covered with horrible bumps when we finally dressed
   and limped back down the beach to where we had left Sala and his girl.

   I was not surprised to find them gone. We walked out to the street and
   waited for a cab. I dropped her at the Caribe and promised to call the
   next day.

   Three

   When I got to work I asked Sala what had happened with his girl. "Don't
   mention that bitch," he muttered. "She got hysterical -- I had to leave."
   He paused. "How was yours?"

   "Fine," I said. "We went out about a mile, then raced back."

   He eyed me curiously, then turned and went to the darkroom.

   I spent the rest of the day doing rewrites. Just as I was leaving, Tyrrell
   called me over and said I had an early assignment at the airport the next
   morning. The mayor of Miami was coming in on the seven-thirty flight and I
   had to be there for an interview. Rather than take a cab, I decided to
   borrow Sala's car.

   At the airport I saw the same sharp-faced little men, sitting by the
   window, waiting for the plane from Miami.

   I bought a Times for forty cents and read about a blizzard in New York:
   "Merritt Parkway closed. . . BMT stalled four hours. . . snowplows in the
   streets. . . the Man in the News was a snowplow driver with a Staten
   Island background. . . Mayor Wagner was up in arms. . . everyone late to
   work. . ."

   I looked out at the bright Caribbean morning, green and lazy and full of
   sun, then I put the Times away.

   The plane from Miami arrived, but the mayor was not on it. After several
   inquiries I discovered that his visit had been canceled "for reasons of
   health."

   I went to a phone booth and called the news room. Moberg answered. "No
   mayor," I said.

   "What!" Moberg snapped.

   "Claims to be ill. Not much to write about. What should I do?" I asked.

   "Stay away from the office," he said. "There's a riot going on -- two of
   our scabs got their arms broken last night." He laughed. "They're going to
   kill us all. Come on in after lunch -- it should be safe by then."

   I went back to the coffee shop and ate my breakfast: bacon, eggs,
   pineapple and four cups of coffee. Then, feeling relaxed and stuffed and
   not particularly caring if the mayor of Miami was dead or alive, I
   strolled out to the parking lot and decided to visit Yeamon. He had given
   me a map to his beach house, but I was not prepared for the sand road. It
   looked like something hacked out of a Philippine jungle. I went the whole
   way in low gear, the sea on my left, a huge swamp on my right-through
   miles of coconut palms, past wooden shacks full of silent, staring
   natives, swerving to avoid chickens and cows in the road, running over
   land crabs, creeping in first gear through deep stagnant puddles, bumping
   and jolting in ruts and chuckholes, and feeling for the first time since
   leaving New York that I had actually come to the Caribbean.

   The early slant of the sun turned the palms a green-gold color. A white
   glare came off the dunes and made me squint as I picked my way through the
   ruts. A grey mist rose out of the swamp, and in front of the shacks were
   negro women, hanging washing on slatted fences. Suddenly I came on a red
   beer truck, making a delivery to a place called El Colmado de Jesus Lopo,
   a tiny thatched-roof store set off in a clearing beside the road. Finally,
   after forty-five minutes of hellish, primitive driving, I came in sight of
   what looked like a cluster of concrete pillboxes on the edge of the beach.
   According to Yeamon, this was it, so I turned off and drove about twenty
   yards through the palms until I came up beside the house.

   I sat in the car and waited for him to appear. His scooter was parked on
   the patio in front of the house, so I knew he was there. When nothing
   happened after several minutes I got out and looked around. The door was
   open, but the house was empty. It was not a house at all, but more like a
   cell. Along one wall was a bed, covered by mosquito netting. The entire
   dwelling consisted of one twelve by twelve room, with tiny windows and a
   concrete floor. Inside it was damp and dark, and I hated to think what it
   was like with the door closed.

   All this I saw at a glance; I was very conscious of my unannounced arrival
   and I didn't want to be caught nosing around like a spy. I crossed the
   patio and walked out to a sand bluff that dropped off sharply to the
   beach. To my right and left was nothing but white sand and palm trees, and
   in front was the ocean. About fifty yards out a barrier reef broke the
   surf.

   Then I saw two figures clinging together near the reef. I recognized
   Yeamon and the girl who had come down with me on the plane. They were
   naked, standing in waist-deep water, with her legs locked around his hips
   and her arms around his neck. Her head was thrown back and her hair
   trailed out behind her, floating on the water like a blonde mane.

   At first I thought I was having a vision. The scene was so idyllic that my
   mind refused to accept it. I just stood there and watched. He was holding
   her by the waist, swinging her around in slow circles. Then I heard a
   sound, a soft happy cry as she stretched out her arms like wings.

   I left then, and drove back to Jesus Lopo's place. I bought a small bottle
   of beer for fifteen cents and sat on a bench in the clearing, feeling like
   an old man. The scene I had just witnessed brought back a lot of memories
   -- not of things I had done but of things I failed to do, wasted hours and
   frustrated moments and opportunities forever lost because time had eaten
   so much of my life and I would never get it back. I envied Yeamon and felt
   sorry for myself at the same time, because I had seen him in a moment that
   made all my happiness seem dull.

   It was lonely, sitting there on that bench with Senor Lopo staring out at
   me like a black wizard from behind his counter in a country where a white
   man in a cord coat had no business or even an excuse to hang around. I sat
   there for twenty minutes or so, enduring his stare, then I drove back out
   to Yeamon's, hoping they would be finished.

   I approached the house cautiously, but Yeamon was yelling at me before I
   turned off the road. "Go back," he shouted. "Don't bring your
   working-class problems out here!"

   I smiled sheepishly and pulled up beside the patio. "Only trouble could
   bring you out so early, Kemp," he said with a grin. "What happened -- did
   the paper fold?"

   I shook my head and got out. "I had an early assignment."

   "Good," he said. "You're just in time for breakfast." He nodded toward the
   hut. "Chenault's whipping it up -- we just finished our morning swim."

   I walked out to the edge of the beach and looked around. Suddenly I felt
   an urge to get naked and run into the water. The sun was hot and I glanced
   enviously at Yeamon, wearing nothing but a pair of black trunks. I felt
   like a bill collector, standing there in a coat and tie, with my face
   dripping sweat and a damp shirt plastered to my back.

   Then Chenault came out of the house. I could tell by her smile that she
   recognized me as the man who had run amok on the plane. I smiled nervously
   and said hello.

   "I remember you," she said, and Yeamon laughed as I fumbled for something
   to say.

   She was wearing a white bikini and her hair fell down to her waist. There
   was nothing of the secretary about her now; she looked like a wild and
   sensual child who had never worn anything but two strips of white cloth
   and a warm smile. She was tiny, but the shape of her body made her seem
   larger; not the thin, undeveloped build of most tiny girls, but a fleshy
   roundness that looked to be all hips and thighs and nipples and
   long-haired warmth.

   "Goddamnit, I'm hungry," said Yeamon. "What about breakfast?"

   "Almost ready," she said. "Do you want a grapefruit?"

   "Damn right," he replied. "Sit down, Kemp. Stop looking so sick. You want
   a grapefruit?"

   I shook my head.

   "Don't be polite," he said. "I know you want one."

   "Okay," I said. "Give me a grapefruit."

   Chenault appeared with two plates. She gave one to Yeamon and put the
   other down in front of me. It was a big omelet with bacon laced over the
   top.

   I shook my head, saying I'd already eaten.

   She smiled. "Don't worry. We have plenty."

   "I'm not kidding," I said. "I ate at the airport."

   "Eat again," said Yeamon. "Then we'll get a few lobsters -- you have all
   morning."

   "Aren't you going in?" I said. "I thought that migrant story was due
   today."

   He grinned and shook his head. "They put me on that sunken treasure thing.
   I'm going out with some divers this afternoon -- they claim they've found
   the wreck of an old Spanish galleon just outside the harbor."

   "Did they kill the migrant story?" I asked.

   "No -- I'll get on it again when I finish this one."

   I shrugged and started to eat. Chenault came out with a plate of her own
   and sat down at the foot of Yeamon's chair.

   "Sit here," I said, and started to get up.

   She smiled and shook her head. "No, this is fine."

   "Sit down," said Yeamon. "You're acting peculiar, Kemp -- this getting up
   early doesn't agree with you."

   I muttered something about decency and returned to my food. Over the top
   of my plate I could see Chenault's legs, small and firm and tan. She was
   so close to naked, and so apparently unaware of it, that I felt helpless.

   After breakfast and a flagon of rum, Yeamon suggested that we take the
   speargun out to the reef and look for some lobster. I quickly agreed,
   feeling that almost anything would be preferable to sitting there and
   stewing in my own lust.

   He had a set of skindiving gear, complete with a big, double-strand gun,
   and I used a mask and a snorkel that he'd bought for Chenault. We paddled
   out to the reef and I watched from the surface as he probed along the
   bottom for lobster. After a while he came up and gave me the gun, but I
   couldn't maneuver very well without flippers, so I gave it up and left the
   diving to him. I liked it better on the surface anyway, floating around in
   the gentle surf, looking back at the white beach and the palms behind it,
   and ducking every few moments to watch Yeamon below me in a different
   world, gliding along the bottom like some kind of monster fish.

   We worked along the reef for about a hundred yards, then he said we should
   try the other side. "Got to be careful out there," he added, paddling
   toward a shallow opening in the reef, "might be sharks-you watch while I'm
   down."

   Suddenly he doubled up and plunged straight down. Seconds later he came up
   with a huge green lobster, thrashing around on the end of his spear.

   Soon he appeared with another one and we went in. Chenault was waiting for
   us on the patio.

   "A fine lunch," Yeamon said, tossing them into a bucket beside the door.

   "What now?" I asked.

   "Just tear the legs off, and we'll boil them up," replied Yeamon.

   "Damn," I said. "I wish I could stay."

   "When do you have to be at work?" he asked.

   "Pretty soon," I replied. "They're waiting for my report on the mayor of
   Miami."

   "Fuck the mayor," he said. "Stay out here and we'll get drunk and kill a
   few chickens."

   "Chickens?" I said.

   "Yeah, my neighbors all have chickens. They run wild. I killed one last
   week when we didn't have any meat." He laughed. "It's fine sport --
   chasing them down with the spear."

   "Jesus," I muttered. "These people will chase you down with a spear if
   they catch you shooting their chickens."

   When I got back to the office I found Sala in the darkroom and told him
   his car was back.

   "Good," he said. "We have to go out to the University. Lotterman wants you
   to meet the power mongers."

   We talked a few minutes and then he asked me how much longer I intended to
   stay at the hotel.

   "I have to move pretty soon," I said. "Lotterman told me I could stay
   there until I found a place of my own, but he said something about a week
   being plenty of time."

   He nodded. "Yeah, he'll have you out pretty soon -- or else he'll stop
   paying your bill." He looked up. "You can stay in my place if you want, at
   least until you find something you like."

   I thought for a moment. He lived in a big vault of a room down in the Old
   City, a ground-floor apartment with a high ceiling and shuttered windows
   and nothing but a hotplate to cook on.

   "I guess so," I said. "What's your rent?"

   "Sixty."

   "Not bad," I said. "You don't think I'll get on your nerves?"

   "Hell," he replied. "I'm never there -- it's too depressing."

   I smiled. "Okay, when should we do it?"

   He shrugged. "Whenever you want. Hell, stay at the hotel as long as you
   can. When he mentions it, tell him you're moving tomorrow."

   He gathered his equipment and we went out the back door to avoid the mob
   in front. It was so hot that I began to sweat each time we stopped for a
   red light. Then, when we started moving again, the wind would cool me off.
   Sala weaved in and out of the traffic on Avenida Ponce de Leon, heading
   for the outskirts of town.

   Somewhere in Santurce we stopped to let some schoolchildren cross the
   street and they all began laughing at us. "La cucaracha!" they yelled.
   "Cucaracha! cucaracha!"

   Sala looked embarrassed.

   "What's going on?" I asked.

   "The little bastards are calling this car a cockroach," he muttered. "I
   should run a few of them down."

   I grinned and leaned back in the seat as we drove on. There was a strange
   and unreal air about the whole world I'd come into. It was amusing and
   vaguely depressing at the same time. Here I was, living in a luxury hotel,
   racing around a half-Latin city in a toy car that looked like a cockroach
   and sounded like a jet fighter, sneaking down alleys and humping on the
   beach, scavenging for food in shark-infested waters, hounded by mobs
   yelling in a foreign tongue -- and the whole thing was taking place in
   quaint old Spanish Puerto Rico, where everybody spent American dollars and
   drove American cars and sat around roulette wheels pretending they were in
   Casablanca. One part of the city looked like Tampa and the other part
   looked like a medieval asylum. Everybody I met acted as if they had just
   come back from a crucial screen test. And I was being paid a ridiculous
   salary to wander around and take it all in, to "find out what was going
   on."

   I wanted to write all my friends and invite them down. I thought of Phil
   Rollins, breaking his ass in New York, chasing after stalled subways and
   gang-fights in Brooklyn; Duke Peterson, sitting in the White Horse and
   wondering what in hell to do next; Carl Browne in London, bitching about
   the climate and grubbing endlessly for assignments; Bill Minnish, drinking
   himself to death in Rome. I wanted to cable them all -- "Come quick stop
   plenty of room in the rum barrel stop no work stop big money stop drink
   all day stop hump all night stop hurry it may not last."

   I was considering this, watching the palms flash by me and feeling the sun
   on my face, when I was suddenly thrown against the windshield as we came
   to a screeching halt. At the same instant a pink taxicab streaked across
   the intersection, missing us by six feet.

   Sala's eyes bulged and the veins stood out in his neck. "Mother of God!"
   he screamed. "Did you see that bastard? Right through the red light!"

   He jerked the car into gear and we roared off. "Jesus!" he muttered.
   "These people are too much! I've got to get out of this place before they
   kill me."

   He was trembling and I offered to drive. He ignored me. "Man, I'm
   serious," he said. "I've got to get away -- my luck's running out"

   He had said the same thing before and I think he believed it. He was
   forever talking about luck, but what he really meant was a very ordered
   kind of fate. He had a strong sense of it -- a belief that large and
   uncontrollable things were working both for and against him, things that
   were moving and happening every minute all over the world. The rise of
   communism worried him because it meant that people were going blind to his
   sensitivity as a human being. The troubles of the Jews depressed him
   because it meant that people needed scapegoats and sooner or later he
   would be one of them. Other things bothered him constantly: the brutality
   of capitalism because his talents were being exploited, the moronic
   vulgarity of American tourists because it gave him a bad reputation, the
   careless stupidity of Puerto Ricans because they were forever making his
   life dangerous and difficult, and even, for some reason I never
   understood, the hundreds of stray dogs that he saw in San Juan.

   Not much of what he said was original. What made him unique was the fact
   that he had no sense of detachment at all. He was like the fanatical
   football fan who runs onto the field and tackles a player. He saw life as
   the Big Game, and the whole of mankind was divided into two teams --
   Sala's Boys, and The Others. The stakes were fantastic and every play was
   vital -- and although he watched with a nearly obsessive interest, he was
   very much the fan, shouting unheard advice in a crowd of unheard advisors
   and knowing all the while that nobody was paying any attention to him
   because he was not running the team and never would be. And like all fans
   he was frustrated by the knowledge that the best he could do, even in a
   pinch, would be to run onto the field and cause some kind of illegal
   trouble, then be hauled off by guards while the crowd laughed.

   We never got to the university because Sala had an epileptic fit and we
   had to turn around. I was rattled, but he shook it off and refused to let
   me drive.

   On the way back to the paper I asked him how he'd managed to keep his job
   as long as a year.

   He laughed. "Who else can they get? I'm the only pro on the island."

   We crept along in a huge traffic jam and finally he got so nervous that I
   had to drive. When we got to the paper the vicious bums had disappeared,
   but the newsroom was in turmoil. Tyrrell, the workhorse, had just quit,
   and Moberg had been beaten half to death by the union goons. They had
   seized him outside the building and avenged their loss to Yeamon.

   Lotterman was sitting on a chair in the middle of the newsroom, groaning
   and jabbering while two cops tried to talk to him. A few feet away,
   Tyrrell sat calmly at his desk, going about his business. He had given a
   week's notice.

   Four

   As I expected, my talk with Segarra turned out to be wasted time. We sat
   at his desk for almost an hour, trading inanities and chuckling at each
   other's jokes. Although he spoke perfect English there was still a
   language barrier, and I sensed immediately that no real meaning would ever
   pass between us. I got the impression that he knew what was going on in
   Puerto Rico, but he seemed to know nothing about journalism. When he
   talked like a politician he made sense, but it was difficult to see him as
   the editor of a newspaper. He seemed to think that as long as he knew the
   score, that was enough. The idea that he should pass on what he knew to
   anyone else, especially to the public at large, would have struck him as
   dangerous heresy. At one point he gave me a jolt when he mentioned that he
   and Sanderson had been classmates at Columbia.

   It took me a long time to understand Segarra's function at the News. They
   called him The Editor, but he was really a pimp and I paid no attention to
   him.

   Perhaps that's why I didn't make many friends in Puerto Rico -- at least
   not the kind of friends I might have made -- because, as Sanderson very
   gently explained to me one day, Segarra came from one of the wealthiest
   and most influential families on the island and his father was a former
   attorney general. When Nick became editor of the Daily News, the paper
   made a lot of valuable friends.

   I had not given Lotterman credit for this kind of devious thinking, but as
   time went by I saw that he used Segarra solely as a front man, a sleek,
   well-oiled figurehead to convince the literate public that the News was
   not a yanqui mouthpiece, but a fine local institution like rum and
   sugarballs.

   After our first talk, Segarra and I exchanged an average of about thirty
   words a week. Once in a while he would leave a note in my typewriter, but
   he made a point of saying as little as possible. In the beginning this
   suited me well enough, even though Sanderson explained that as long as
   Segarra had the nix on me I was doomed to social oblivion.

   But I had no social ambitions in those days. I had a license to wander. I
   was a working journalist and I had easy access to anything I needed,
   including the finest cotillions and the Governor's house and secret coves
   where debutantes swam naked at night.

   After a while, however, Segarra began to bother me. I had a feeling that I
   was being cut out of things and that he was the reason for it. When I was
   not invited to parties that I would not have gone to in the first place,
   or when I called some government official on the phone and was brushed off
   by his secretary, I began to feel like a social leper. This wouldn't have
   bothered me at all had I felt it was my own doing, but the fact that
   Segarra was exercising some sinister control over me began to get on my
   nerves. Whatever he might have denied me was unimportant; it was the fact
   that he could deny me anything at all, even what I didn't want

   At first I was tempted to laugh it off, to give him as hard a time as I
   could and let him do his worst. But I didn't, because I was not quite
   ready to pack up and move on again. I was getting a little too old to make
   powerful enemies when I held no cards at all, and I had lost some of my
   old zeal that had led me, in the past, to do what I damn well felt like
   doing, with the certain knowledge that I could always flee the
   consequences. I was tired of fleeing, and tired of having no cards. It
   occurred to me one evening, as I sat by myself in Al's patio, that a man
   can live on his wits and his balls for only so long. I'd been doing it for
   ten years and I had a feeling that my reserve was running low.

   Segarra and Sanderson were good friends, and, oddly enough, although
   Segarra considered me a boor, Sanderson went out of his way to be decent.
   A few weeks after I met him I had to call Adelante about a story I was
   doing, and I thought I might as well talk to Sanderson as anyone else.

   He greeted me like an old buddy, and after giving me all the information I
   needed, he invited me out to his house for dinner that night. I was so
   surprised that I accepted without a thought. The tone of his voice made it
   seem so natural that I should eat dinner at his house that I had already
   hung up before I realized that it was not natural at all.

   After work I took a cab out to his house. When I got there I found
   Sanderson on his porch with a man and a woman who had just come in from
   New York. They were on their way to St. Lucia to meet their yacht, which
   the crew had brought back from Lisbon. A mutual friend had told them to
   look up Sanderson when they stopped in San Juan and they had taken him
   completely by surprise.

   "I've sent out for some lobster," he told us. "We have no choice but to
   drink until it arrives."

   It turned out to be an excellent evening. The couple from New York
   reminded me of something I had not seen in a long time. We talked of
   yachts, which I knew because I had worked on them in Europe, and which
   they knew because they came from a world where everyone seemed to own one.
   We drank white rum, which Sanderson said was much better than gin, and by
   midnight we were all drunk enough to go down to the beach for a naked
   swim.

   After that night I spent almost as much time at Sanderson's as I spent at
   Al's. His apartment looked like it had been designed in Hollywood for a
   Caribbean movie set. It was the bottom half of an old stucco house, right
   on the beach near the edge of town. The living room had a domed ceiling,
   with a fan hanging down and a wide door that opened on a screen porch. In
   front of the porch was a garden full of palms, with a gate leading down to
   the beach. The porch was higher than the garden, and at night you could
   sit there with a drink and see all the way into the city. Once in a while
   a cruise ship passed out at sea, brightly lit and heading for St. Thomas
   or the Bahamas.

   When the night was too warm, or when you got too drunk, you could take a
   towel and go down to the beach for a swim. Afterward, there was good
   brandy, and if you were still drunk there was an extra bed.

   Only three things bothered me at Sanderson's -- one was Sanderson, who was
   such an excellent host that I wondered what was wrong with him; one was
   Segarra, who was very often there when I came by; and the other was a man
   named Zimburger, who lived in the top half of the house.

   Zimburger was more beast than human -- tall, paunchy and bald, with a face
   out of some fiendish comic strip. He claimed to be an investor and was
   forever talking about putting up hotels here and there, but as far as I
   could see the only thing he did was go to Marine Corps Reserve meetings on
   Wednesday nights. Zimburger had never got over the fact that he had been a
   captain in The Corps. Early on Wednesday afternoon he would put on his
   uniform and come down to Sanderson's porch to drink until it was time for
   the meeting. Sometimes he wore the uniform on Mondays, or Fridays --
   usually on some flimsy pretext.

   "Extra training today," he would say. "Commander So-and-So wants me to
   help out with pistol instruction."

   Then he would laugh and get another drink. He never took off his overseas
   cap, even after he had been indoors for five or six hours. He drank
   incessantly, and by the time it got dark he was steaming drunk and
   shouting. He would pace around the porch or the living room, snarling and
   denouncing the "cowards and the back-dusters in Washington" for not
   sending the Marines into Cuba.

   "I'll go!" he would shout. "Goddamn right I'll go! Somebody has to stomp
   them bastards and it might as well be me!"

   Often he wore his pistol belt and his holster -- he had to leave his gun
   on the base -- and from time to time he would slap leather and bark at
   some imaginary foe outside the door. It was embarrassing to see him go for
   his gun, because he seemed to think it was really there, riding large and
   loose on his flabby hip, "just like it was on Iwo Jima." It was a pitiful
   sight and I was always glad when he left.

   I avoided Zimburger whenever I could, but sometimes he took us by
   surprise. I would go to Sanderson's with a girl I had met somewhere; we
   would have dinner and sit around talking afterward -- and suddenly there
   would be a pounding on the screen door. In he would come, his face red,
   his khaki shirt stained with sweat, his overseas cap crushed down on his
   bullet-shaped head -- and he would sit down with us for God knows how
   long, carrying on at the top of his lungs about some international
   disaster that could easily have been averted "if they'd just let the
   goddamn Marines do their job, instead of keeping us penned up like dogs."

   For my money, Zimburger should not only have been penned up like a dog,
   but shot like a mad one. How Sanderson tolerated him I couldn't
   understand. He was never anything but gracious to Zimburger, even when it
   became obvious to everyone else that the man should be strapped up and
   rolled into the sea like a sack of waste. I guessed it was because
   Sanderson was too much a public relations man. I never once saw him lose
   his temper, and in his job he was saddled with more bores and bastards and
   phonies than any man on the island.

   Sanderson's view of Puerto Rico was very different from any I'd heard at
   the News. He had never seen a place with more potential, he said. In ten
   years it would be a paradise, a new American gold coast. There was so much
   opportunity that it staggered his imagination.

   He got very excited when he talked about all the things that were
   happening in Puerto Rico, but I was never sure how much of his talk he
   believed. I never contradicted him, but he knew I didn't take him quite
   seriously.

   "Don't give me that crooked smile," he would say. "I worked for the paper
   -- I know what those idiots say."

   Then he'd get even more excited. "Where do you get this superior
   attitude?" he would say. "Nobody down here cares if you went to Yale or
   not. All you are to these people is a low-life reporter, just another bum
   from the Daily News."

   This business about Yale was a grisly joke. I had never been within fifty
   miles of New Haven, but in Europe I discovered that it was much easier to
   say I was a Yale graduate than to explain why I quit after two years at
   Vanderbilt and volunteered for the draft. I never told Sanderson I went to
   Yale; he must have got it from Segarra, who undoubtedly read my letter to
   Lotterman.

   Sanderson had gone to the University of Kansas, then to Columbia's
   journalism school. He claimed to be proud of his farm-belt background, but
   he was so obviously ashamed of it that I felt sorry for him. Once when he
   was drunk he told me that the Hal Sanderson from Kansas was dead -- he had
   died on the train to New York, and the Hal Sanderson I knew had been born
   the moment that train pulled into Penn Station.

   He was lying, of course. For all his Caribbean clothes and his Madison
   Avenue manners, even with his surfside apartment and his Alfa Romeo
   roadster, there was so much Kansas in Sanderson that it was embarrassing
   to see him deny it. And Kansas was not all that was in him. There was a
   lot of New York, a little of Europe, and something else that has no
   country at all and was probably the largest single fact of his life. When
   he first told me that he owed twenty-five hundred dollars to a
   psychiatrist in New York and was spending fifty dollars a week on one in
   San Juan, I was dumbfounded. From that day on I saw him in a very
   different light.

   Not that I thought he was crazy. He was a phony, of course, but for a long
   time I thought he was one of those phonies who can snap it on and off at
   will. He seemed honest enough with me, and in those rare moments when he
   relaxed I enjoyed him immensely. But it was not often that he dropped his
   guard, and usually it was rum that made him do it He relaxed so seldom
   that his natural moments had an awkward, childish quality that was almost
   pathetic. He had come so far from himself that I don't think he knew who
   he was anymore.

   For all his flaws, I respected Sanderson; he had come to San Juan as a
   reporter for a new paper that most people thought was a joke, and three
   years later he was vice president of the biggest public relations firm in
   the Caribbean. He had damn well worked at it -- and if it was not the sort
   of thing I had much use for, I had to admit he had done it well.

   Sanderson had good reason to be optimistic about Puerto Rico. From his
   vantage point at Adelante, he was in on more deals and making more money
   than he knew what to do with. I had no doubt that, barring the possibility
   of a great upswing in analysts' fees, he was no more than ten years away
   from being a millionaire. He said five, but I doubled it because it seemed
   almost indecent that a man doing Sanderson's kind of work should make a
   million dollars before he was forty.

   He was so much on top of things that I suspected that he had lost sight of
   the line between business and conspiracy. When somebody wanted land for a
   new hotel, when a top-level disagreement sent rumblings through the
   administration, or when anything of importance was on its way to
   happening, Sanderson usually knew more about it than the Governor.

   This fascinated me, for I had always been an observer, one who arrived on
   the scene and got a small amount of money for writing what he saw and
   whatever he could find out by asking a few hurried questions. Now,
   listening to Sanderson, I felt on the verge of a massive breakthrough.
   Considering the confusion of The Boom and the grab-bag morality that was
   driving it along, I felt for the first time in my life that I might get a
   chance to affect the course of things instead of merely observing them. I
   might even get rich; God knows, it seemed easy enough. I gave it a lot of
   thought, and though I was careful never to mention it, I began to see a
   new dimension in everything that happened.

   Five

   Sala's apartment on Calle Tetuan was about as homey as a cave, a dank
   grotto in the very bowels of the Old City. It was not an upscale
   neighborhood. Sanderson shunned it and Zimburger called it a sewer. It
   reminded me of a big handball court in some stench-ridden YMCA. The
   ceiling was twenty feet high, not a breath of clean air, no furniture
   except two metal cots and an improvised picnic table, and since it was on
   the ground floor we could never open the windows because thieves would
   come in off the street and sack the place. A week after Sala moved in he
   left one of the windows unlocked and everything he owned was stolen, even
   his shoes and his dirty socks.

   We had no refrigerator and therefore no ice, so we drank hot rum out of
   dirty glasses and did our best to stay out of the place as much as
   possible. It was easy to understand why Sala didn't mind sharing; neither
   of us ever went there except to change clothes or sleep. Night after night
   I would sit uselessly at Al's, drinking myself into a stupor because I
   couldn't stand the idea of going back to the apartment.

   After living there a week I'd established a fairly strict routine. I would
   sleep until ten or so, depending on the noise level in the street, then
   take a shower and walk up to Al's for breakfast. With a few exceptions,
   the normal workday at the paper was from noon until eight in the evening,
   give or take a few hours either way. Then we would come back to Al's for
   dinner. After that it was the casinos, an occasional party, or simply
   sitting at Al's and listening to each other's stories until we all got
   drunk and mumbled off to our beds. Sometimes I would go to Sanderson's and
   usually there were people there to drink with. Except for Segarra and the
   wretched greedhead Zimburger, almost everyone at Sanderson's was from New
   York or Miami or the Virgin Islands. They were buyers or builders or
   sellers in one way or another, and now that I look back on it I don't
   recall a single name or face out of the hundred or so that I met there.
   Not a distinctive soul in the lot, but it was a pleasant, social kind of
   atmosphere and a welcome break from those dreary nights at Al's.

   One Monday morning I was awakened by what sounded like children being
   butchered outside the window. I looked through a crack in the shutter and
   saw about fifteen tiny Puerto Ricans, dancing on the sidewalk and
   tormenting a three-legged dog. I cursed them viciously and hurried up to
   Al's for breakfast.

   Chenault was there, sitting alone in the patio and reading a secondhand
   copy of Lady Chatterley's Lover. She looked very young and pretty, wearing
   a white dress and sandals, with her hair falling loose down her back. She
   smiled as I went over to the table and sat down.

   "What brings you in so early?" I asked.

   She closed her book. "Oh, Fritz had to go somewhere and finish that story
   he's been working on. I have to cash some traveler's checks and I'm
   waiting for the bank to open."

   "Who's Fritz?" I said. . .

   She looked at me as if I were not quite awake.

   "Yeamon?" I asked quickly.

   She laughed. "I call him Fritz. That's his middle name -- Addison Fritz
   Yeamon. Isn't that fine?"

   I agreed that it was. I had never thought of him as anything but Yeamon.
   As a matter of fact I knew almost nothing about him at all. During the
   course of those evenings at Al's I had heard the life story of almost
   every man on the paper, but Yeamon invariably went straight home after
   work and I had come to regard him as a loner with no real past and a
   future so vague that there was no sense talking about it. Nonetheless, I
   felt that I knew him well enough so that we did not have to do much
   talking. From the very beginning I had felt a definite contact with
   Yeamon, a kind of tenuous understanding that talk is pretty cheap in this
   league and that a man who knew what he was after had damn little time to
   find it, much less to sit back and explain himself.

   Nor did I know anything about Chenault, except that she had undergone a
   tremendous change since my first sight of her at the airport. She was tan
   and happy now, not nearly so tense with that nervous energy that had been
   so obvious when she wore her secretary suit. But not all of it was gone.
   Somewhere beneath that loose blonde hair and that friendly, little-girl
   smile I sensed a thing that was moving hard and fast toward some
   long-awaited opening. It made me a little nervous; and on top of that I
   remembered my initial lust for her and the sight of her locked with Yeamon
   that morning in the water. I also remembered those two immodest strips of
   white cloth around her ripe little body on the patio. All this was very
   much on my mind as I sat with her there at Al's and ate my breakfast.

   It was hamburger with eggs. When I came to San Juan Al's menu consisted of
   beer, rum and hamburgers. It was a pretty volatile breakfast, and several
   times I was drunk by the time I got to work. One day I asked him to get
   some eggs and coffee. At first he refused, but when I asked him again he
   said he would. Now, for breakfast, you could have an egg on your
   hamburger, and coffee instead of rum.

   "Are you here for good?" I said, looking up at Chenault.

   She smiled. "I don't know. I quit my job in New York." She looked up at
   the sky. "I just want to be happy. I'm happy with Fritz -- so I'm here."

   I nodded thoughtfully. "Yeah, that seems reasonable."

   She laughed. "It won't last. Nothing lasts. But I'm happy now."

   "Happy," I muttered, trying to pin the word down. But it is one of those
   words, like Love, that I have never quite understood. Most people who deal
   in words don't have much faith in them and I am no exception -- especially
   the big ones like Happy and Love and Honest and Strong. They are too
   elusive and far too relative when you compare them to sharp, mean little
   words like Punk and Cheap and Phony. I feel at home with these, because
   they're scrawny and easy to pin, but the big ones are tough and it takes
   either a priest or a fool to use them with any confidence.

   I was not ready to put any labels on Chenault, so I tried to change the
   subject.

   "What story is he working on?" I asked, offering her a cigarette.

   She shook her head. "The same one," she replied. "He's had a terrible time
   with it -- that thing about Puerto Ricans going to New York."

   "Damn," I said. "I thought he finished that a long time ago."

   "No," she said. "They kept giving him new assignments. But this one has to
   be in today -- that's what he's doing now."

   I shrugged. "Hell, he shouldn't worry about it. One story more or less on
   a sloppy paper like this doesn't make much difference."

   About six hours later, I found out that it did make a difference, although
   not in the way I had meant. After breakfast I walked with Chenault to the
   bank, then I went to work. It was just about six when Yeamon came back
   from wherever he had been all afternoon. I nodded to him, then watched
   with mild curiosity as Lotterman called him over to the desk. "I want to
   talk to you about that emigration story," he said. "Just what in hell are
   you trying to put over on me?"

   Yeamon looked surprised. "What do you mean?"

   Lotterman suddenly began to shout. "I mean you're not getting away with
   it! You spent three weeks on that story and now Segarra tells me it's
   useless!"

   Yeamon's face turned red and he leaned toward Lotterman as if he were
   going to grab his throat. "Useless?" he said quietly. "Why is it. . .
   useless?"

   Lotterman was as angry as I'd ever seen him, but Yeamon looked so
   threatening that he quickly changed his tone -- just slightly, but enough
   to notice. "Listen," he said. "I'm not paying your salary so you can write
   magazine articles-- what the hell were you thinking about when you turned
   in twenty-six pages of copy?"

   Yeamon leaned forward. "Break it up," he replied. "You don't have to run
   it all at once."

   Lotterman laughed. "Oh -- so that's it! You want me to run a serial --
   you're looking for a Pulitzer Prize, eh?" He stepped forward and raised
   his voice again. "Yeamon, when I want a serial I'll ask for a serial --
   are you too dense to understand that?"

   Everyone was watching now and I half expected Yeamon to scatter
   Lotterman's teeth all over the newsroom. When he spoke I was surprised at
   his calm. "Look," he said sharply, "you asked for a story on why Puerto
   Ricans leave Puerto Rico -- right?"

   Lotterman stared at him.

   "Okay, so I worked on the story for a week -- not three, if you remember
   that other crap you gave me -- and now you're yelling because it's
   twenty-six pages long! Well, goddamnit it should have been sixty pages
   long! If I'd written the story I wanted to write you'd be run out of town
   for publishing it!"

   Lotterman seemed uncertain. "Well," he said after a pause, "if you want to
   do a sixty-page story that's your business -- but if you want to work for
   me I'll have that story in a thousand words for tomorrow morning's paper."

   Yeamon smiled faintly. "Segarra's good at that sort of thing -- why don't
   you have him condense it?"

   Lotterman swelled up like a toad. "What are you saying?" he shouted. "That
   you won't do it?"

   Yeamon smiled again. "I was just wondering," he said, "if you've ever had
   your head twisted."

   "What's that?" snapped Lotterman. "Did I hear you threaten to twist my
   head?"

   Yeamon smiled. "A man never knows when his head might get twisted."

   "Good God!" Lotterman exclaimed. "You sound like a nut, Yeamon -- people
   get locked up for saying things like that!"

   "Yes indeed," Yeamon replied. "Heads get TWISTED!" He said this in a loud
   voice and made a violent twisting gesture with his hands, never taking his
   eyes off Lotterman.

   Now Lotterman seemed genuinely alarmed. "You are a nut," he said
   nervously. "Maybe you'd better resign, Yeamon -- right now."

   "Oh no," Yeamon said quickly. "No chance of that -- I'm too busy."

   Lotterman was getting shaky. I knew he didn't want to fire Yeamon, because
   he'd have to give him a month's severance pay. After a pause, he said
   again: "Yes, Yeamon, I think you'd better resign. You don't seem happy
   here -- why don't you quit?"

   Yeamon laughed. "I'm happy enough. Why don't you fire me?"

   There was a tense silence. We all waited for Lotterman's next move, amused
   and a little bewildered by the whole scene. At first it had seemed like
   just another one of Lotterman's tirades, but Yeamon's maniacal replies had
   given it a weird and violent flavor.

   Lotterman stared at him for a moment, looking more nervous than ever, then
   he turned and went into his office.

   I sat back in my chair, grinning at Yeamon, then I heard Lotterman
   shouting my name. I spread my hands in a public shrug, then got up slowly
   and went to his office.

   He was hunched over his desk, fumbling with a baseball that he used as a
   paperweight "Take a look at this," he said. "Tell me if you think it's
   worth condensing." He handed me a sheaf of newsprint that I knew was
   Yeamon's story.

   "Suppose it is," I said. "Then I condense it?"

   "That's right," he replied. "Now don't give me any shit. Just read it and
   tell me what you can do with it."

   I took it back to my desk and read it twice. After the first reading I
   knew why Segarra had called it useless. Most of it was dialogue,
   conversations with Puerto Ricans at the airport. They were telling why
   they were going to New York, what they were looking for and what they
   thought of the lives they were leaving behind.

   At a glance, it was pretty dull stuff. Most of them seemed naive and
   ignorant -- they hadn't read the travel brochures and the rum
   advertisements, they knew nothing of The Boom -- all they wanted was to
   get to New York. It was a dreary document, but when I finished it there
   was no doubt in my mind as to why these people were leaving. Not that
   their reasons made sense, but they were reasons, nonetheless -- simple
   statements, born in minds I could never understand because I had grown up
   in St. Louis in a house with two bathrooms and I had gone to football
   games and gin-jug parties and dancing school and I had done a lot of
   things, but I had never been a Puerto Rican.

   It occurred to me that the real reason these people were leaving this
   island was basically the same reason I had left St. Louis and quit college
   and said to hell with all the things I was supposed to want -- indeed, all
   the things I had a responsibility to want -- to uphold, as it were -- and
   I wondered how I might have sounded if someone had interviewed me at
   Lambert Airport on the day I left for New York with two suitcases and
   three hundred dollars and an envelope full of my clippings from an Army
   newspaper.

   "Tell me, Mr. Kemp, just why are you leaving St. Louis, where your family
   has lived for generations and where you could, for the asking, have a
   niche carved out for yourself and your children so that you might live in
   peace and security for the rest of your well-fed days?"

   "Well, you see, I. . . ah. . . well, I get a strange feeling. I. . . ah. .
   . I sit around here and I look at this place and I just want to get out,
   you know? I want to flee."

   "Mr. Kemp, you seem like a reasonable man -- just what is it about St.
   Louis that makes you want to flee? I'm not prying, you understand, I'm
   just a reporter and I'm from Tallahassee, myself, but they sent me out
   here to --"

   "Certainly. I just wish I could. . . ah. . . you know, I'd like to be able
   to tell you that. . . ah. . . maybe I should say that I feel a rubber sack
   coming down on me. . . purely symbolic, you know. . . the venal ignorance
   of the fathers being visited on the sons. . . can you make something of
   that?"

   "Well, ha-ha, I sort of know what you mean, Mr. Kemp. Back in Tallahassee
   it was a cotton sack, but I guess it was about the same size and --"

   "Yeah, it's the goddamn sack -- so I'm taking off and I guess I'll. . .
   ah. . ."

   "Mr. Kemp, I wish I could say how much I sympathize, but you understand
   that if I go back with a story about a rubber sack they're going to tell
   me it's useless and probably fire me. Now I don't want to press you, but I
   wonder if you could give me something more concrete; you know -- is there
   not enough opportunity here for aggressive young men? Is St. Louis meeting
   her responsibilities to youth? Is our society not flexible enough for
   young people with ideas? You can talk to me, Mr. Kemp -- what is it?"

   "Well, fella, I wish I could help you. God knows I don't want you to go
   back without a story and get fired. I know how it is -- I'm a journalist
   myself, you know -- but. . . well. . . I get The Fear. . . can you use
   that? St. Louis Gives Young Men The Fear -- not a bad headline, eh?"

   "Come on, Kemp, you know I can't use that; Rubber Sacks, The Fear."

   "Goddamnit, man, I tell you it's fear of the sack! Tell them that this man
   Kemp is fleeing St. Louis because he suspects the sack is full of
   something ugly and he doesn't want to be put in with it. He senses this
   from afar. This man Kemp is not a model youth. He grew up with two toilets
   and a football, but somewhere along the line he got warped. Now all he
   wants is Out, Flee. He doesn't give a good shit for St Louis or his
   friends or his family or anything else. . . he just wants to find some
   place where he can breathe. . . is that good enough for you?"

   "Well, ah, Kemp, you sound a bit hysterical. I don't know if I can get the
   story on you or not."

   "Well fuck you then. Get out of my way. They're calling my flight -- hear
   that voice? Hear it?"

   "You're deranged, Kemp! You'll come to no good end! I knew people like you
   back in Tallahassee and they all ended up --"

   Yeah, they all ended up like Puerto Ricans. They fled and they couldn't
   say why, but they damn well wanted out and they didn't care if the
   newspapers understood or not. Somehow they got the idea that by getting
   the hell away from where they were they could find something better. They
   heard the word, the rotten devilish word that makes people incoherent with
   desire to move on -- not everybody in the world lives in tin shacks with
   no toilets and no money at all and no food but rice and beans; not
   everybody cuts sugarcane for a dollar a day, or hauls a load of coconuts
   into town to sell for two cents each -- the cheap, hot, hungry world of
   their fathers and their grandfathers and all their brothers and sisters
   was not the whole story, because if a man could muster the guts or even
   the desperation to move a few thousand miles there was a pretty good
   chance that he'd have money in his pocket and meat in his belly and one
   hell of a romping good time.

   Yeamon had caught their mood perfectly. In twenty-six pages he had gone
   way beyond the story of why Puerto Ricans shove off for New York; in the
   end it was a story of why a man leaves home in the face of ugly odds, and
   when I finished it I felt small and silly for all the tripe I had written
   since I'd been in San Juan. Some of the conversations were amusing and
   others were pathetic -- but through them all ran the main thread, the
   prime mover, the fact that these people thought they might have a chance
   in New York, and in Puerto Rico they had no chance at all.

   When I finished reading it a second time I took it back to Lotterman and
   told him I thought he should run it as a five-part serial.

   He slammed his baseball on the desk. "Goddamnit, you're as crazy as
   Yeamon! I can't run a serial nobody's going to read."

   "They'll read it," I said, knowing they wouldn't.

   "Don't give me that stuff!" he barked. "I read two pages and it bored me
   stiff -- a goddamn mountain of griping. Where does he get that kind of
   nerve? He hasn't been here two months and he tries to con me into using a
   story that sounds like something out of Pravda -- and he wants it run as a
   serial!"

   "Well," I said. "You asked what I thought."

   He glared up at me. "Is that your way of saying you won't do it?"

   I wanted to flatly refuse -- and I would have, I think, but I hesitated an
   instant too long. It was no more than an instant, but that was long enough
   for me to consider the consequences -- fired, no salary, packing up again,
   fighting for a foothold somewhere else. So I said, "You're running the
   newspaper. I'm just telling you what I thought -- since that's what you
   asked for."

   He stared at me and I could see him mulling the thing over in his mind.
   Suddenly he whacked the ball off his desk and sent it bouncing into a
   corner. " Goddamnit!" he yelled. "Here I pay that guy a fat salary and
   what do I get out of him? A bunch of crap I can't use!" He fell back in
   the chair. "Well, he's finished. I knew he was trouble the minute I saw
   him. Now Segarra tells me he's running around the city on a motorcycle
   with no muffler, scaring the hell out of people. Did you hear him threaten
   to twist my head! Did you see his eyes? The guy's a nut -- I should have
   him locked up!

   "We don't need people like that," he said. "It's one thing if they're
   worth a damn, but he's not. He's just a big bum, trying to make trouble."

   I shrugged and turned to go, feeling angry and confused and a little
   ashamed of myself.

   Lotterman called after me. "Tell him to come in here. We'll pay him off
   and get him out of the building."

   I crossed the room and told Yeamon that Lotterman wanted to see him. Just
   then I heard Lotterman call Segarra into his office. They were both in
   there when Yeamon went in.

   Ten minutes later he reappeared and came over to my desk. "Well, no more
   salary," he said quietly. "Claims he doesn't owe me any severance pay
   either."

   I shook my head sadly. "Man, what a rotten deal. I don't know what the
   hell is wrong with him."

   Yeamon looked idly around the room. "Nothing unusual," he said. "I think
   I'll go up to Al's for a beer."

   "I saw Chenault up there earlier," I said.

   He nodded. "I took her home. She cashed in the last of her traveler's
   checks."

   I shook my head again, trying to think of something quick and cheerful to
   say, but before I could think of anything he was halfway across the room.

   "See you later," I called after him. "We'll get drunk."

   He nodded without turning around. I watched him clean out his desk. Then
   he left, saying nothing to anyone.

   I killed the rest of the day writing letters. At eight I found Sala in the
   darkroom and we drove up to Al's. Yeamon was alone in the patio, sitting
   at a corner table with his feet propped up on a chair and a distant
   expression on his face. He looked up as we approached. "Well," he said
   quietly. "The journalists."

   We mumbled and sat down with the drinks we had brought from the bar. Sala
   leaned back and lit a cigarette. "So the son of a bitch fired you," he
   said.

   Yeamon nodded. "Yep."

   "Well, don't let him play games with that severance pay," Sala said. "If
   he gives you any trouble put the Labor Department on his ass -- you'll get
   paid."

   "I'd better," said Yeamon. "Otherwise I'll have to catch that bastard
   outside the building some night and beat it out of him."

   Sala shook his head. "Don't worry. When he fired Art Glinnin he got socked
   for five bills. Glinnin finally took him to court."

   "He paid me for three days," said Yeamon. "Figured it out to the last
   hour."

   "Hell," said Sala, "report him tomorrow. Bust him. Let them serve a
   complaint -- he'll pay."

   Yeamon thought for a moment. "That should come to a little over four
   hundred. I could live for a while, anyway."

   "This is a hell of a place to go broke," I said. "Four hundred's not much
   when you figure you need fifty just to get to New York."

   He shook his head. "That's the last place I'll go. I don't get along with
   New York." He sipped his drink. "No, when I abandon this place I think
   I'll head south down the islands and look around for a cheap freighter to
   Europe." He nodded thoughtfully. "I don't know about Chenault."

   We stayed at Al's all evening, talking about the places a man could go in
   Mexico and the Caribbean and South America. Sala was so bitter about
   Yeamon's being fired that he said several times that he was going to quit.
   "Who needs this place?" he shouted. "Blow it off the goddamn face of the
   earth -- who needs it?"

   I knew it was the rum talking, but after a while it began to talk for me
   too, and by the time we started back to the apartment I was ready to quit,
   myself. The more we talked about South America, the more I wanted to go
   there.

   "It's a hell of a place," Sala kept saying. "Plenty of money floating
   around, English-language papers in all the big cities -- by God, that may
   be the place!"

   On the way down the hill we walked three abreast in the cobblestone
   street, drunk and laughing and talking like men who knew they would
   separate at dawn and travel to the far corners of the earth.

   Six

   Needless to say, Sala didn't quit and neither did I. The atmosphere at the
   paper was more tense than ever. On Wednesday, Lotterman got a summons from
   the Department of Labor, ordering him to a hearing on the question of
   Yeamon's severance pay. He cursed about it all afternoon, saying it would
   be a cold day in hell before he'd give that nut a dime. Sala began taking
   bets on the outcome, giving three-to-one odds that Yeamon would collect.

   To make things worse, Tyrrell's departure had forced Lotterman to take
   over as city editor. This meant he did most of the work. It was only
   temporary, he said, but so far his ad in Editor & Publisher had drawn a
   blank.

   I was not surprised. "Editor," it said. "San Juan daily. Begin
   immediately. Drifters and drinkers need not apply."

   At one point he offered the job to me. I came in one day and found a note
   in my typewriter, saying Lotterman wanted to see me. When I opened the
   door to his office he was fumbling idly with his baseball. He smiled
   shrewdly and tossed it up in the air. "I've been thinking," he said. "You
   seem pretty sharp -- ever handled a city desk?"

   "No," I replied.

   "Like to give it a whirl?" he asked, tossing the ball again.

   I wanted no part of it. There would be a good raise, but there would also
   be a hell of a lot of extra work. "I haven't been here long enough," I
   said. "I don't know the city."

   He tossed the baseball up in the air and let it thud on the floor. "I
   know," he said. "I was just thinking."

   "What about Sala?" I said, knowing Sala would turn it down. He had so many
   freelance assignments that I wondered why he bothered to keep his job at
   all.

   "Not a chance," he replied. "Sala doesn't give a damn about the paper --
   he doesn't give a damn about anything." He leaned forward and dropped the
   baseball on the desk. "Who else is there? Moberg's a drunk, Vanderwitz is
   a psycho, Noonan's a fool, Benetiz can't speak English. . . Christ! Where
   do I get these people?" He fell back in his chair with a groan. "I've got
   to have somebody!" he shouted. "I'll go crazy if I have to do the whole
   paper myself!"

   "What about the ad?" I said. "No replies?"

   He groaned again. "Sure -- wineheads! One guy claimed to be the son of
   Oliver Wendell Holmes -- as if I gave a goddamn!" He slammed the ball
   violently on the floor. "Who keeps sending these wineheads down here?" he
   shouted. "Where do they come from?"

   He shook his fist at me and spoke as if he were uttering his last words:
   "Somebody has to fight it, Kemp -- they're taking over. These wineheads
   are taking over the world. If the press goes under, we're sunk -- you
   understand that?"

   I nodded.

   "By Jesus," he went on, "we have a responsibility! A free press is vital!
   If a pack of deadbeats get hold of this newspaper it's the beginning of
   the end. First they'll get this one, then they'll get a few more, and one
   day they'll get the Times -- can you imagine it?"

   I said I couldn't.

   "They'll get us all!" he exclaimed. "They're dangerous -- insidious! That
   guy claiming he was the son of Justice Holmes -- I could pick him out of a
   crowd -- he'd be the one with hair on his neck and a crazy look in his
   eye!"

   Just then, as if on cue, Moberg came through the door, carrying a clipping
   from El Diario.

   Lotterman's eyes became wild. "Moberg!" he screamed. "Oh Jesus -- where do
   you get the nerve to come in here without knocking! By God I'll have you
   locked up! Get out!"

   Moberg retreated quickly, rolling his eyes at me as he left.

   Lotterman glared after him. "The nerve of that goddamn sot," he said.
   "Christ, a sot like that should be put to sleep."

   Moberg had been in San Juan only a few months, but Lotterman seemed to
   loathe him with a passion that it would take most men years to cultivate.
   Moberg was a degenerate. He was small, with thin blond hair and a face
   that was pale and flabby. I have never seen a man so bent on
   self-destruction -- not only self, but destruction of everything he could
   get his hands on. He was lewd and corrupt in every way. He hated the taste
   of rum, yet he would finish a bottle in ten minutes, then vomit and fall
   down. He ate nothing but sweet rolls and spaghetti, which he would heave
   the moment he got drunk. He spent all his money on whores and when that
   got dull he would take on an occasional queer, just for the strangeness of
   it. He would do anything for money, and this was the man we had on the
   police beat. Often he disappeared for days at a time. Then someone would
   have to track him down through the dirtiest bars in La Perla, a slum so
   foul that on maps of San Juan it appears as a blank space. La Perla was
   Moberg's headquarters; he felt at home there, he said, and in the rest of
   the city -- except for a few horrible bars -- he was a lost soul.

   He told me that he'd spent the first twenty years of his life in Sweden,
   and often I tried to picture him against a crisp Scandinavian landscape. I
   tried to see him on skis, or living peacefully with his family in some
   cold mountain village. From the little he said of Sweden I gathered he'd
   lived in a small town and his parents had been comfortable people with
   enough money to send him to college in America.

   He spent two years at NYU, living in the Village at one of those residence
   hotels that cater to foreigners. This apparently unhinged him. Once he was
   arrested on Sixth Avenue, he said, for pissing on a fireplug like a dog.
   It cost him ten days in the Tombs, and when he got out he left immediately
   for New Orleans. He floundered there for a while, then got a job on a
   freighter headed for the Orient. He worked on boats for several years
   before drifting into journalism. Now, thirty-three years old and looking
   fifty, his spirit broken and his body swollen with drink, he bounced from
   one country to another, hiring himself out as a reporter and hanging on
   until he was fired.

   Disgusting as he usually was, on rare occasions he showed flashes of a
   stagnant intelligence. But his brain was so rotted with drink and
   dissolute living that whenever he put it to work it behaved like an old
   engine that had gone haywire from being dipped in lard.

   "Lotterman thinks I'm a Demogorgon," he would say. "You know what that is?
   Look it up -- no wonder he doesn't like me."

   One night at Al's he told me he was writing a book, called The
   Inevitability of a Strange World. He took it very seriously. "It's the
   kind of book a Demogorgon would write," he said. "Full of shit and terror
   -- I've selected the most horrible things I could imagine -- the hero is a
   flesh eater disguised as a priest -- cannibalism fascinates me -- once
   down at the jail they beat a drunk until he almost died -- I asked one of
   the cops if I could eat a chunk of his leg before they killed him. . ." He
   laughed. "The swine threw me out -- hit me with a club." He laughed again.
   "I would have eaten it -- why shouldn't I? There's nothing sacred about
   human flesh -- it's meat like everything else -- would you deny that?"

   "No," I said. "Why should I deny it?"

   It was one of the few times I talked to him that I could understand what
   he said. Most of the time he was incoherent. Lotterman was forever
   threatening to fire him, but we were so understaffed that he couldn't
   afford to let anyone go. When Moberg spent a few days in the hospital
   after his beating at the hands of the strikers, Lotterman had hopes that
   he might straighten out. But when he came back to work he was more erratic
   than before.

   At times I wondered which would be the first to go -- Moberg, or the News.
   The paper gave every appearance of being on its last legs. Circulation was
   falling off and we were losing advertising so steadily that I didn't see
   how Lotterman could hold out. He had borrowed heavily to get the paper
   going, and according to Sanderson, it had never made a nickel.

   I kept hoping for an influx of new blood, but Lotterman had become so wary
   of "wineheads" that he rejected every reply to his ads. "I've got to be
   careful," he explained. "One more pervert and we're finished."

   I feared he couldn't afford to pay any more salaries, but one day a man
   named Schwartz appeared in the office, saying he had just been thrown out
   of Venezuela, and Lotterman hired him immediately. To everyone's surprise
   he turned out to be competent. After a few weeks he was doing all the work
   that Tyrrell had done.

   This took a lot of the strain off Lotterman, but it didn't do much for the
   paper. We went from twenty-four pages down to sixteen, and finally to
   twelve. The outlook was so bleak that people began saying El Diario had
   the News's obituary set in type and ready to go.

   I felt no loyalty to the paper, but it was good to have a salary while I
   fished for something larger. The idea that the News might fold began to
   worry me and I wondered why San Juan, with all its new prosperity,
   couldn't support such a small thing as an English-language newspaper. The
   News was no prize-winner, but it was at least readable.

   A large part of the trouble was Lotterman. He was capable enough, in a
   purely mechanical way, but he had put himself in an untenable position. As
   an admitted ex-communist, he was under constant pressure to prove how much
   he'd reformed. At that time the U.S. State Department was calling Puerto
   Rico "America's advertisement in the Caribbean -- living proof that
   capitalism can work in Latin America." The people who had come there to do
   the proving saw themselves as heroes and missionaries, bringing the holy
   message of Free Enterprise to the downtrodden jibaros. They hated commies
   like they hated sin, and the fact that an ex-Red was publishing a paper in
   their town did not make them happy.

   Lotterman simply couldn't cope with it. He went out of his way to attack
   anything that smelled even faintly of the political Left, because he knew
   he'd be crucified if he didn't. On the other hand, he was a slave to the
   freewheeling Commonwealth government, whose U.S. subsidies were not only
   supporting half the new industry on the island, but were paying for most
   of the News advertising as well. It was a nasty bind -- not just for
   Lotterman, but for a good many others. In order to make money they had to
   deal with the government, but to deal with the government was to condone
   "creeping socialism" -- which was not exactly compatible with their
   missionary work.

   It was amusing to see how they handled it, because if they thought about
   it at all there was only one way out -- to praise the ends and ignore the
   means, a time-honored custom that justifies almost anything except
   shrinking profits.

   To go to a cocktail party in San Juan was to see all that was cheap and
   greedy in human nature. What passed for society was a loud, giddy whirl of
   thieves and pretentious hustlers, a dull sideshow full of quacks and
   clowns and philistines with gimp mentalities. It was a new wave of Okies,
   heading south instead of west, and in San Juan they were kingfish because
   they had literally taken over.

   They formed clubs and staged huge social events, and finally one of them
   began publishing a merciless scandal sheet that terrified and intimidated
   everyone whose past was not politically pure. This took in half the gang,
   including poor Lotterman, who suffered some vicious libel almost every
   week.

   There was no shortage of free liquor for the press, because all hustlers
   crave publicity. No occasion was too small for them to give what they
   called a "press party" in its honor. Each time Woolworth's or the Chase
   Manhattan Bank opened a new branch, they celebrated with an orgy of rum.
   Not a month went by without the opening of a new bowling alley; they were
   building them on every vacant lot, so many bowling alleys that it was
   horrible to ponder the meaning of it.

   From the new San Juan Chamber of Commerce came a stream of statements and
   proclamations that made Jehovah's Witnesses seem pale and pessimistic --
   long breast-beating screeds, announcing one victory after another in the
   crusade for Big Money. And on top of all this, there was a never-ending
   round of private parties for visiting celebrities. Here again, no half-wit
   Riwanian was too insignificant for a blow-out in his honor.

   I usually went to these things with Sala. At the sight of his camera the
   guests would turn to jelly. Some of them would act like trained pigs and
   others would mill around like sheep, all waiting for "the man from the
   paper" to push his magic button and make their lavish hospitality pay off.

   We tried to go early, and while Sala was herding them around for a series
   of meaningless photos that would probably never even be developed, I would
   steal as many bottles of rum as I could carry. If there was a bartender I
   would tell him I wanted a bit of drink for the press, and if he protested
   I would take them anyway. No matter what kind of outrage I committed, I
   knew they would never complain.

   Then we would head for Al's, dropping the rum at the apartment on the way.
   We put all the bottles on an empty bookshelf and sometimes there were as
   many as twenty or thirty. In a good week we would hit three parties and
   average three or four bottles for each half hour of painful socializing.
   It was a good feeling to have a stock of rum that would never run out, but
   after a while I could no longer stand even a few minutes at each party,
   and I had to give it up.

   Seven

   One Saturday in late March, when the tourist season was almost over and
   the merchants were bracing themselves for the muggy low-profit summer,
   Sala had an assignment to go down to Fajardo, on the eastern tip of the
   island, and take some pictures of a new hotel that was going up on a hill
   overlooking the harbor. Lotterman thought the News could strike a cheerful
   note by pointing out that things were going to be even better next season.

   I decided to go along for the ride. Ever since I'd come to San Juan I'd
   been meaning to get out on the island, but without a car it was
   impossible. My furthest penetration had been to Yeamon's, about twenty
   miles out, and Fajardo was twice as far in the same direction. We decided
   to get some rum and stop by his place on the way back, hoping to get there
   just as he paddled in from the reef with a bulging sack of lobsters. "He's
   probably damn good at it by now," I said. "God knows what he's living on
   -- they must have a steady diet of lobster and chicken."

   "Hell," Sala remarked, "chicken's expensive."

   I laughed. "Not out there. He shoots them with a speargun."

   "God almighty!" Sala exclaimed. "That's voodoo country -- they'll murder
   him, sure as hell!"

   I shrugged. I'd assumed from the very beginning that Yeamon would sooner
   or later be killed -- by somebody or some faceless mob, for some reason or
   other, it seemed inevitable. There was a time I had been the same way. I
   wanted it all and I wanted it fast and no obstacle was big enough to put
   me off. Since then I had learned that some things were bigger than they
   looked from a distance, and now I was not so sure anymore just what I was
   going to get or even what I deserved. I was not proud of what I had
   learned but I never doubted it was worth knowing. Yeamon would either
   learn the same things, or he would certainly be croaked.

   This is what I told myself on those hot afternoons in San Juan when I was
   thirty years old and my shirt stuck damply to my back and I felt myself on
   that big and lonely hump, with my hardnose years behind me and all the
   rest downhill. They were eerie days, and my fatalistic view of Yeamon was
   not so much conviction as necessity, because if I granted him even the
   slightest optimism I would have to admit a lot of unhappy things about
   myself.

   We came to Fajardo after an hour's drive in the hot sun and immediately
   stopped for a drink at the first bar. Then we drove up a hill on the
   outskirts of town, where Sala puttered around for almost an hour, setting
   up his camera angles. He was a grudging perfectionist, no matter how much
   contempt he had for his assignment. As "the only pro on the island," he
   felt he had a certain reputation to uphold.

   When he finished we bought two bottles of rum and a bag of ice. Then we
   drove back to the turnoff that would take us to Yeamon's beach house. The
   road was paved all the way to the River at Lolza, where two natives
   operated a ferry. They charged us a dollar for the car, then poled us
   across to the other side, not saying a word the whole time. I felt like a
   pilgrim crossing the Ganges, standing there in the sun beside the car and
   staring down at the water while the ferrymen leaned on their poles and
   shoved us toward the palm grove on the other side. We bumped against the
   dock and they secured the barge to an upright log while Sala drove the car
   to solid ground.

   We still had five miles of sand road before we got to Yeamon's place. Sala
   cursed the whole way, swearing he would turn back except that he'd be hit
   for another dollar to go back across the river. The little car thumped and
   bounced on the ruts and I thought it would come to pieces at any moment.
   Once we passed a pack of naked children stoning a dog beside the road.
   Sala stopped and took several pictures.

   "Jesus," he muttered, "look at those vicious little bastards! We'll be
   lucky to get out of here alive."

   When we finally got to Yeamon's we found him on the patio, wearing the
   same filthy black trunks and building a bookshelf out of driftwood. The
   place looked better now; part of the patio was covered with an awning made
   of palm fronds, and beneath it were two canvas deck chairs that looked
   like they belonged in one of the better beach clubs.

   "Man," I said, "where did you get those?"

   "Gypsies," he replied. "Five dollars apiece. I think they stole 'em in
   town."

   "Where's Chenault?" Sala asked.

   He pointed down at the beach. "Probably sunning herself down by that log.
   She puts on a show for the natives -- they love her."

   Sala brought the rum and the bag of ice from the car. Yeamon chuckled
   happily and poured the ice in a tub beside the door. "Thanks," he said.
   "This poverty is driving me nuts -- we can't even afford ice."

   "Man," I said. "You've bottomed out. You've got to get some work."

   He laughed and filled three glasses with ice. "I'm still after Lotterman,"
   he said. "It looks like I might get my money."

   Just then Chenault came up from the beach, wearing the same white bikini
   and carrying a big beach towel. She smiled at Yeamon: "They came again. I
   heard them talking."

   "Goddamnit," Yeamon snapped. "Why do you keep going down there? What the
   hell is wrong with you?"

   She smiled and sat down on the towel. "It's my favorite place. Why should
   I leave just because of them?"

   Yeamon turned to me. "She goes down to the beach and takes off her clothes
   -- the natives hide back in the palms and watch her."

   "Not always," Chenault said quickly. "Usually it's just on weekends."

   Yeamon leaned forward and shouted at her. "Well goddamn you! Don't go down
   there anymore! From now on you stay up here if you want to lie around
   naked! I'll be goddamned if I'll spend all my time worrying about you
   getting raped." He shook his head with disgust. "One of these days they'll
   get you and if you keep on teasing the poor bastards I'll damn well let
   them have you!"

   She stared down at the concrete. I felt sorry for her and stood up to make
   her a drink. When I handed it to her she looked up gratefully and took a
   long swallow.

   "Drink up," said Yeamon. "We'll invite some of your friends and have a
   real party!" Then he fell back in the chair. "Ah, the good life," he
   muttered.

   We sat there drinking for a while, Chenault saying nothing, Yeamon doing
   most of the talking, and finally he got up and picked a coconut off the
   sand beside the patio. "Come on," he said, "let's have a little football."

   I was glad for anything that would clear the air, so I put down my drink
   and ran awkwardly out for a pass. He spiraled it perfectly, but it smacked
   my fingers like lead and I dropped it.

   "Let's get down on the beach," he called. "Plenty of room to run."

   I nodded and waved to Sala. He shook his head. "Go play," he muttered. "Me
   and Chenault have serious things to discuss."

   Chenault smiled halfheartedly and waved us down to the beach. "Go on," she
   said.

   I slid down the bluff to the hard-packed sand on the beach. Yeamon threw
   up his arm and ran at an angle toward the surf. I tossed the nut high and
   long, watching it fall just beyond him in the water and make a quick
   splash. He fell on it and went under, bringing it up in his hands.

   I turned and sprinted away, watching it float down at me out of the hot
   blue sky. It hurt my hands again, but this time I hung on. It was a good
   feeling to snag a long pass, even if it was a coconut. My hands grew red
   and tender, but it was a good clean feeling and I didn't mind. We ran
   short, over-the-middle passes and long floaters down the sidelines, and
   after a while I couldn't help but think we were engaged in some kind of
   holy ritual, the reenactment of all our young Saturdays -- expatriated
   now, lost and cut off from those games and those drunken stadiums, beyond
   the noise and blind to the false color of those happy spectacles -- after
   years of jeering at football and all that football means, here I was on an
   empty Caribbean beach, running these silly pass patterns with all the zeal
   of a regular sandlot fanatic.

   As we raced back and forth, falling and plunging in the surf, I recalled
   my Saturdays at Vanderbilt and the precision beauty of a Georgia Tech
   backfield, pushing us back and back with that awful belly series, a lean
   figure in a gold jersey, slashing over a hole that should never have been
   there, now loose on the crisp grass of our secondary and an unholy shout
   from the stands across the way; and finally to bring the bastard down,
   escape those blockers coming at you like cannonballs, then line up again
   and face that terrible machinery. It was a torturous thing, but beautiful
   in its way; here were men who would never again function or even
   understand how they were supposed to function as well as they did today.
   They were dolts and thugs for the most part, huge pieces of meat, trained
   to a fine edge -- but somehow they mastered those complex plays and
   patterns, and in rare moments they were artists.

   Finally I got too tired to run anymore and we went back up to the patio,
   where Sala and Chenault were still talking. They both seemed a little
   drunk, and after a few minutes of conversation I realized that Chenault
   was fairly out of her head. She kept chuckling to herself and mocking
   Yeamon's southern accent.

   We drank for another hour or so, laughing indulgently at Chenault and
   watching the sun slant off toward Jamaica and the Gulf of Mexico. It's
   still light in Mexico City, I thought. I had never been there and suddenly
   I was overcome by a tremendous curiosity about the place. Several hours of
   rum, combined with my mounting distaste for Puerto Rico, had me right on
   the verge of going into town, packing my clothes, and leaving on the first
   westbound plane. Why not? I thought. I hadn't cashed this week's paycheck
   yet; a few hundred in the bank, nothing to tie me down -- why not, indeed?
   It was bound to be better than this place, where my only foothold was a
   cheap job that looked ready to collapse.

   I turned to Sala. "How much is it from here to Mexico City?"

   He shrugged and sipped his drink. "Too much," he replied. "Why? Are you
   moving on?"

   I nodded. "I'm pondering it."

   Chenault looked up at me, her face serious for a change. "You'd love
   Mexico City, Paul."

   "What the hell do you know about it?" Yeamon snapped.

   She glared up at him, then took a long drink from her glass.

   "That's it," he said. "Keep sucking it down -- you're not drunk enough
   yet."

   "Shut up!" she screamed, jumping to her feet. "Leave me alone, you goddamn
   pompous fool!"

   His arm shot out so quickly that I barely saw the movement; there was the
   sound of a smack as the back of his hand hit her cheek. It was almost a
   casual gesture, no anger, no effort, and by the time I realized what had
   happened he was leaning back in the chair again, watching impassively as
   she staggered back a few feet and burst into tears. No one spoke for a
   moment, then Yeamon told her to go inside. "Go on," he snapped. "Go to
   bed."

   She stopped crying and took her hand away from her cheek. "Damn you," she
   sobbed.

   "Get in there," he said.

   She glared at him a moment longer, then turned and went inside. We could
   hear the squeak of springs as she fell on the bed, then the sobbing
   continued.

   Yeamon stood up. "Well," he said quietly, "sorry to subject you people to
   that sort of thing." He nodded thoughtfully, glancing at the hut. "I think
   I'll go into town with you -- anything happening tonight?"

   Sala shrugged. I could tell he was upset. "Nothing," he said. "All I want
   is food, anyway."

   Yeamon turned toward the door. "Hang on," he said. "I'll get dressed."

   After he went inside, Sala turned to me and shook his head sadly. "He
   treats her like a slave," he whispered. "She'll crack up pretty soon."

   I stared out to sea, watching the sun disappear.

   We could hear him moving around inside, but there was no talk. When he
   came out he was dressed in his tan suit, with a tie flung loosely around
   his neck. He pulled the door shut and locked it from the outside. "Keep
   her from wandering around," he explained. "She'll probably pass out pretty
   soon, anyway."

   There was a sudden burst of sobbing from inside the hut. Yeamon gave a
   hopeless shrug and tossed his coat in Sala's car. "I'll take the scooter,"
   he said, "so I won't have to stay in town."

   We backed out to the road and let him go ahead. His scooter looked like
   one of those things they used to parachute behind the lines in World War
   Two -- a skeleton chassis, showing signs of a red paint job far gone with
   rust, and beneath the seat was a little engine that made a sound like a
   Gatling gun. There was no muffler and the tires were completely bald.

   We followed him along the road, nearly hitting him several times when he
   slid in the sand. He set a fast pace and we were hard pressed to keep up
   without tearing the car to pieces. As we passed the native shacks little
   children came running out to the road to wave to us. Yeamon waved back,
   grinning broadly and giving a tall, straight-armed salute as he sped
   along, trailing a cloud of dust and noise.

   We stopped where the paved road began, and Yeamon suggested we go to a
   place just a mile or so further on. "Pretty good food and cheap drink," he
   said, "and, besides, they'll give me credit."

   We followed him down the road until we came to a sign that said CASA
   CABRONES. An arrow pointed to a dirt road that branched off toward the
   beach. It went through a grove of palms and ended in a small parking lot,
   next to a ratty restaurant with tables on the patio and a jukebox beside
   the bar. Except for the palms and the Puerto Rican clientele, it reminded
   me of a third-rate tavern in the American Midwest. A string of blue bulbs
   hung from two poles on either side of the patio, and every thirty seconds
   or so the sky above us was sliced by a yellow beam from the airport tower,
   no more than a mile away.

   As we sat down and ordered our drinks I realized we were the only gringos
   in the place. The others were locals. They made a great deal of noise,
   singing and shouting with the jukebox, but they all seemed tired and
   depressed. It was not the rhythmic sadness of Mexican music, but the
   howling emptiness of a sound I have never heard anywhere but in Puerto
   Rico -- a combination of groaning and whining, backed up by a dreary
   thumping and the sound of voices bogged down in despair.

   It was terribly sad -- not the music itself, but the fact that it was the
   best they could do. Most of the tunes were translated versions of American
   rock-and-roll, with all the energy gone. I recognized one as "Maybellene."
   The original version had been a hit when I was in high school. I recalled
   it as a wild and racy tune, but the Puerto Ricans had made it a
   repetitious dirge, as hollow and hopeless as the faces of the men who sang
   it now in this lonely wreck of a roadhouse. They were not hired musicians,
   but I had a feeling they were putting on a performance, and any moment I
   expected them to fall silent and pass the hat. Then they would finish
   their drinks and file quietly into the night, like a troupe of clowns at
   the end of a laughless day.

   Suddenly the music stopped and several men rushed for the jukebox. A
   quarrel broke out, a flurry of insults -- and then, from somewhere far in
   the distance, like a national anthem played to calm a frenzied crowd, came
   the slow tinkling of Brahms' Lullaby. The quarrel ceased, there was a
   moment of silence, several coins fell into the bowels of the jukebox, and
   then it broke into a whimpering yell. The men returned to the bar,
   laughing and slapping each other on the back.

   We ordered three more rums and the waiter brought them over. We'd decided
   to drink a while, putting off dinner till later, and by the time we got
   around to ordering food the waiter told us the kitchen was closed.

   "Never in hell!" Yeamon exclaimed. "That sign says midnight." He pointed
   to a sign above the bar.

   The waiter shook his head.

   Sala looked up at him. "Please," he said, "you're my friend. I can't stand
   this anymore. I'm hungry."

   The waiter shook his head again, staring at the green order pad in his
   hand.

   Suddenly Yeamon banged his fist on the table. The waiter looked fearful,
   then scurried behind the bar. Everyone in the place turned to look at us.

   "Let's have some meat!" Yeamon shouted. "And more rum!"

   A fat little man wearing a white short-sleeve shirt came running out of
   the kitchen. He patted Yeamon on the shoulder. "Good fellows," he said
   with a nervous smile. "Good customers -- no trouble, okay?"

   Yeamon looked at him. "All we want is meat," he said pleasantly, "and
   another round of drinks."

   The little man shook his head. "No dinner after ten," he said. "See?" He
   jabbed his finger at the clock. It was ten-twenty.

   "That sign says midnight," Yeamon replied.

   The man shook his head.

   "What's the problem?" Sala asked. "The steaks won't take five minutes.
   Hell, forget the potatoes."

   Yeamon held up his glass. "Let's get three drinks," he said, waving three
   fingers at the bartender.

   The bartender looked at our man, who seemed to be the manager. He nodded
   quickly, then walked away. I thought the crisis had passed.

   In a moment he was back, bringing a little green check that said $11.50.
   He put it on the table in front of Yeamon.

   "Don't worry about it," Yeamon told him.

   The manager clapped his hands. "Okay," he said angrily. "You pay." He held
   out his hand.

   Yeamon brushed the check off the table. "I said don't worry about it."

   The manager snatched the check off the floor. "You pay!" he screamed. "Pay
   now!"

   Yeamon's face turned red and he rose half out of his chair. "I'll pay it
   like I paid the others," he yelled. "Now get the hell away from here and
   bring us our goddamn meat."

   The manager hesitated, then leaped forward and slapped the check on the
   table. "Pay now!" he shouted. "Pay now and get outer I call police."

   He had barely got the words out of his mouth when Yeamon grabbed him by
   the front of his shirt. "You cheap little bastard!" he snarled. "You keep
   yelling and you'll never get paid."

   I watched the men at the bar. They were bug-eyed and tense as dogs. The
   bartender stood poised at the door, ready to either flee or run outside
   and get a machete -- I wasn't sure.

   The manager, out of control by this time, shook his fist at us and
   screeched, "Pay, you goddamn Yankees! Pay and get out!" He glared at us,
   then ran over to the bartender and whispered something in his ear.

   Yeamon got up and put on his coat. "Let's go," he said. "I'll deal with
   this bastard later."

   The manager seemed terrified at the prospect of welshers walking out on
   him. He followed us into the parking lot, cursing and pleading by turns.
   "Pay now!" he howled. "When will you pay?. . . you'll see, the police will
   come. . . no police, just pay!"

   I thought the man was crazy and my only desire was to get him off our
   backs. "Christ," I said. "Let's pay it."

   "Yeah," said Sala, bringing out his wallet. "This place is sick."

   "Don't worry," said Yeamon. "He knows I'll pay." He tossed his coat in the
   car, then turned to the manager. "You rotten little creep, get a grip on
   yourself!"

   We got in the car. As soon as Yeamon started his scooter the manager ran
   back and began shouting to the men inside the bar. His screams filled the
   air as we pulled off, following Yeamon out the long driveway. He refused
   to hurry, idling along like a man intrigued with the scenery, and in a
   matter of seconds two carloads of screaming Puerto Ricans were right
   behind us. I thought they might run us down. They were driving big
   American cars and could have squashed the Fiat like a roach.

   "Holy shit," Sala kept saying, "we're going to be killed."

   When we came to the paved road, Yeamon pulled over and let us pass. We
   stopped a few yards ahead of him and I called back, "Come on, damnit!
   Let's get out of here."

   The other cars came up beside him and I saw him throw up his hands as if
   he'd been hit. He jumped off the scooter, letting it fall, and grabbed a
   man whose head was outside the window. Almost at the same moment I saw the
   police drive up. Four of them leaped out of a little blue Volkswagen,
   waving their billy clubs. The Puerto Ricans cheered wildly and scrambled
   out of their cars. I was tempted to run, but we were instantly surrounded.
   One of the cops ran up to Yeamon and pushed him backward. "Thief!" he
   shouted. "You think gringos drink free in Puerto Rico?"

   At the same time, both doors of the Fiat were jerked open and Sala and I
   were pulled out I tried to break loose, but several people were holding my
   arms. Somewhere beside me I could hear Yeamon saying over and over: "Well,
   the man spit on me, the man spit on me. . ."

   Suddenly everybody stopped shouting and the scene boiled down to an
   argument between Yeamon, the manager and a man who appeared to be the cop
   in charge. Nobody was holding me now, so I moved up to hear what was going
   on.

   "Look," Yeamon was saying. "I paid the other bills -- what makes him think
   I won't pay this one?"

   The manager said something about drunk, arrogant Yankees.

   Before Yeamon could reply, one of the cops stepped up behind him and
   slammed him on the shoulder with his billy. He shouted and lurched to one
   side, onto one of the men who had come after us in the cars. The man swung
   wildly with a beer bottle, hitting him in the ribs. The last thing I saw
   before I went down was Yeamon's savage rush on the man with the bottle. I
   heard several swacks of bone against bone, and then, out of the corner of
   my eye, I saw something come at my head. I ducked just in time to take the
   main force of the blow on my back. It buckled my spine and I fell to the
   ground.

   Sala was screaming somewhere above me and I was thrashing around on my
   back, trying to avoid the feet that were pounding me like hammers. I
   covered my head with my arms and lashed out with my feet, but the awful
   hammering continued. There was not much pain, but even through the
   numbness I knew they were hurting me and I was suddenly sure I was going
   to die. I was still conscious, and the knowledge that I was being kicked
   to death in a Puerto Rican jungle for eleven dollars and fifty cents
   filled me with such terror that I began to scream like an animal. Finally,
   just as I thought I was passing out, I felt myself being shoved into a
   car.

   Eight

   I was half-unconscious during the ride, and when the car finally stopped I
   looked out and saw an angry mob howling on the sidewalk. I knew I couldn't
   stand another beating; when they tried to haul me out I clung desperately
   to the back of the seat until one of the cops hit me on the arm with his
   club.

   To my surprise, the crowd made no move to attack us. We were pushed up the
   steps, past a group of sullen cops at the door, and led into a small,
   windowless room where they told us to sit on a bench. Then they closed the
   door and left us alone.

   "Jesus Christ," said Yeamon. "This is incredible. We have to get hold of
   somebody."

   "We're headed for La Princesa," Sala groaned. "The bastards have us now --
   this is the end."

   "They have to let us use the phone," I said. "I'll call Lotterman."

   Yeamon snorted. "He won't do a damn thing for me. Hell, he wants me locked
   up."

   "He won't have any choice," I replied. "He can't afford to abandon me and
   Sala."

   Yeamon looked doubtful. "Well. . . I can't think of anybody else to call."

   Sala groaned again and rubbed his head. "Christ, we'll be lucky to get out
   of here alive."

   "We got off easy," said Yeamon, gently feeling his teeth. "I thought we
   were done for when it started."

   Sala shook his head. "These people are vicious," he muttered. "I was
   dodging that cop and somebody hit me from behind with a coconut -- nearly
   broke my neck."

   The door opened and the boss cop appeared, smiling as if nothing had
   happened. "Okay?" he said, watching us curiously.

   Yeamon looked up at him. "We'd like to use the phone," he said.

   The cop shook his head. "Your names?" he said, pulling out a small
   notebook.

   "If you don't mind," said Yeamon. "I think we have a right to make a phone
   call."

   The cop made a menacing gesture with his fist. "I said NO!" he shouted.
   "Give me your names!"

   We gave our names.

   "Where are you staying?" he asked.

   "Goddamnit, we live here!" Sala snapped. "I work for the Daily News and
   I've lived on this stinking rock for more than a year!" He was trembling
   with rage and the cop looked startled. "My address is 409 Calle Tetuan,"
   Sala continued, "and I want a lawyer immediately."

   The cop thought for a moment "You work for the Daily News?"

   "You're damn right," Sala replied.

   The cop looked down at us and smiled wickedly. "Tough guys," he said.
   "Tough Yankee journalists."

   No one said anything for a moment, then Yeamon asked again to use the
   phone. "Look," he said. "Nobody's trying to be tough. You just beat the
   hell out of us and now we want a lawyer -- is that too much to ask?"

   The cop smiled again. "Okay, tough guys."

   "What the hell is this 'tough guy' business?" Sala exclaimed. "Where the
   Christ is a phone?"

   He started to get up and he was still in a crouch, halfway off the bench,
   when the cop stepped forward and gave him a savage rabbit punch on the
   neck. Sala dropped to his knees and the cop kicked him in the ribs. Three
   more cops burst into the room as if they'd been waiting for the signal.
   Two of them grabbed Yeamon, twisting his arms behind his back, and the
   other one knocked me off the bench and stood over me with his stick. I
   knew he wanted to hit me and I didn't move, trying not to give him an
   excuse. After a long moment, the boss cop yelled, "Okay, tough guys, let's
   go." I was jerked off the floor and we were forced down the hall at a
   half-trot, our arms twisted painfully behind our backs.

   At the end of the hall we came into a big room full of people and cops and
   a lot of desks -- and there, sitting on a table in the middle of the room,
   was Moberg. He was writing in a notebook.

   "Moberg!" I yelled, not caring if I was hit as long as I attracted his
   attention. "Call Lotterman! Get a lawyer!"

   At the sound of Moberg's name, Sala looked up and screamed with rage and
   pain: "Swede! For Christ's sake call somebody! We're being killed!"

   We were pushed through the room at high speed and I had no more than a
   glimpse of Moberg before we were in another hallway. The cops paid no
   attention to our shouts; apparently they were used to people screaming
   desperately as they were led away to wherever we were being taken. My only
   hope was that Moberg had not been too drunk to recognize us.

   We spent the next six hours in a tiny concrete cell with about twenty
   Puerto Ricans. We couldn't sit down because they had pissed all over the
   floor, so we stood in the middle of the room, giving out cigarettes like
   representatives of the Red Cross. They were a dangerous-looking lot Some
   were drunk and others seemed crazy. I felt safe as long as we could supply
   them with cigarettes, but I wondered what would happen when we ran out.

   The guard solved this problem for us, at a nickel a cigarette. Each time
   we wanted one for ourselves we had to buy twenty-one for every man in the
   cell. After two rounds, the guard sent out for a new carton. We figured
   out later that our stay in the cell cost us more than fifteen dollars,
   which Sala and I paid, since Yeamon had no money.

   It seemed like we had been there for six years when the guard finally
   opened the door and beckoned us out. Sala could hardly walk and Yeamon and
   I were so tired that we had trouble supporting him. I had no idea where we
   were going. Probably to the dungeon, I thought. This is the way people
   disappear.

   We went back through the building, along several hallways, and finally
   into a large courtroom. As we were shoved through the door, looking as
   dirty and disheveled as the most horrible bums in the cell we had just
   left, I looked around anxiously for some familiar face.

   The courtroom was jammed and I looked for several minutes before I saw
   Moberg and Sanderson standing solemnly in one corner. I nodded to them and
   Moberg held up his fingers in a circle.

   "Thank God," said Sala. "We've made contact."

   "Is that Sanderson?" Yeamon asked.

   "Looks like it," I said, not having the faintest idea what it meant.

   "What's that prick doing here?" Sala mumbled.

   "We could do a hell of a lot worse," I said. "We're damn lucky anybody's
   here."

   It was almost an hour before they called our case. The boss cop was the
   first to speak and his testimony was delivered in Spanish. Sala, who
   understood parts of what he was saying, kept muttering: "That lying
   bastard. . . claims we threatened to tear the place up. . . attacked the
   manager. . . ran out on our bill. . . hit a cop. . . Christ Jesus!. . .
   started a fight when we got to headquarters. . . God, this is too much!
   We're done for!"

   When the boss cop had finished, Yeamon asked for a translation of the
   testimony, but the judge ignored him.

   The manager testified next, sweating and gesturing with excitement, his
   voice rising to an hysterical pitch as he swung his arms and shook his
   fists and pointed at us as if we had killed his entire family.

   We understood nothing of what he said, but it was obvious that things were
   going against us. When it finally came our turn to speak, Yeamon got up
   and demanded a translation of all the testimony against us.

   "You heard it," said the judge in perfect English.

   Yeamon explained that none of us spoke Spanish well enough to understand
   what had been said. "These people spoke English before," he said, pointing
   at the cop and the manager. "Why can't they speak it now?"

   The judge smiled contemptuously. "You forget where you are," he said.
   "What right do you have to come here and cause trouble, and then tell us
   to speak your language?"

   I could see that Yeamon was losing his temper and I motioned to Sanderson
   to do something. Just then I heard Yeamon say he "would expect fairer
   treatment under Batista."

   A dead silence fell on the courtroom. The judge stared at Yeamon, his eyes
   bright with anger. I could almost feel the axe descending.

   Sanderson called from the back of the room: "Your Honor, could I have a
   word?"

   The judge looked up. "Who are you?"

   "My name is Sanderson. I'm with Adelante."

   A man I had never seen stepped quickly up to the judge and whispered in
   his ear. The judge nodded, then looked back at Sanderson. "Go ahead," he
   said.

   Sanderson's voice seemed out of place after the wild denunciations of the
   cop and the manager. "These men are American journalists," he said. "Mr.
   Kemp is with the New York Times, Mr. Yeamon represents the American Travel
   Writers' Association, and Mr. Sala works for Life magazine." He paused,
   and I wondered just how much good this kind of thing was going to do. Our
   earlier identification as Yankee journalists had been disastrous.

   "Perhaps I'm wrong," Sanderson continued, "but I think this testimony has
   been a little confusing, and I'd hate to see it result in any unnecessary
   embarrassment." He glanced at the boss cop, then back to the judge.

   "Jesus," Yeamon whispered. "I hope he knows what he's doing."

   I nodded, watching the judge's face. Sanderson's last comment had been
   delivered in a tone of definite warning, and it crossed my mind that he
   might be drunk. For all I knew, he had come straight from some party where
   he'd been drinking steadily since early afternoon.

   "Well, Mr. Sanderson," said the judge in an even voice. "What do you
   suggest?"

   Sanderson smiled politely. "I think it might be wise to continue this
   hearing when the atmosphere is a little less strained."

   The same man who had spoken to the judge earlier was back at the bench.
   There was a quick exchange of words, then the judge spoke to Sanderson.

   "You have a point," he said, "but these men have behaved in an arrogant
   way -- they have no respect for our laws."

   Sanderson's face darkened. "Well, Your Honor, if the case is going to be
   tried tonight, I'll have to ask for a recess until I can contact Adolfo
   Quinones." He nodded. "I'll have to wake him up, of course, get Senor
   Quinones out of bed, but I don't feel qualified to act any further as an
   attorney."

   There was another hurried conference at the bench. I could see that the
   name Quinones had given the court some pause. He was the News' attorney,
   an ex-senator, and one of the most prominent men on the island.

   We all watched nervously as the conference continued. Finally the judge
   looked over and told us to stand. "You will be released on bail," he said.
   "Or you may wait in jail -- as you like." He jotted something down on a
   piece of paper.

   "Robert Sala," he said. Sala looked up. "You are charged with public
   drunkenness, disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. Bail is set at one
   thousand dollars."

   Sala grumbled and looked away.

   "Addison Yeamon," said the judge. "You are charged with public
   drunkenness, disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. Bail is set at one
   thousand dollars."

   Yeamon said nothing.

   "Paul Kemp," said the judge. "You are charged with public drunkenness,
   disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. Bail is set at three hundred
   dollars."

   This was almost as much of a shock as anything that had happened all night
   I felt as if I'd committed a treachery of some kind. It seemed to me that
   I'd resisted well enough -- had it been my screaming? Was the judge taking
   pity on me because he knew I'd been stomped? I was still pondering it as
   we were led out of the courtroom and into the hall.

   "What now?" said Yeamon. "Can Sanderson afford that kind of bail?"

   "Don't worry," I said. "He'll handle it." As I said it I felt like a fool.
   If worst came to worst, I could cover my bail out of my own pocket.

   And I knew somebody would post Sala's, but Yeamon was a different matter.
   Nobody was going to make sure he came to work on Monday. The more I
   thought about it, the more certain I was that in a few minutes we were
   going to go free and he would go back to that cell, because there wasn't a
   soul on the island with a thousand dollars who had even the slightest
   interest in keeping Yeamon out of jail.

   Suddenly Moberg appeared, followed by Sanderson and the man who'd been
   huddling with the judge. Moberg laughed drunkenly as he approached us. "I
   thought they were going to kill you," he said.

   "They almost did," I replied. "What about this bail? Can we get that much
   money?"

   He laughed again. "It's paid. Segarra told me to sign a check." He lowered
   his voice. "He said to pay the fines if they weren't more than a hundred
   dollars. He's lucky -- there weren't any fines."

   "You mean we're out?" said Sala.

   Moberg grinned. "Of course. I signed for it"

   "Me too?" said Yeamon.

   "Certainly," Moberg replied. "The deed is done -- you're all free."

   As we started for the door, Sanderson shook hands with the man he'd been
   talking with, and hurried after us. It was almost dawn and the sky was a
   light grey. Except for a few people around the police station, the streets
   were calm and empty. A few big freighters stood at anchor in the bay,
   waiting for morning and the tugboats that would bring them in.

   By the time we got to the street, I could see the first rays of the sun, a
   cool pink glow in the eastern sky. The fact that I'd spent all night in a
   cell and a courtroom made that morning one of the most beautiful I've ever
   seen. There was a peace and a brightness about it, a chilly Caribbean dawn
   after a night in a filthy jail. I looked out at the ships and the sea
   beyond them, and I felt crazy to be free with a whole day ahead of me.

   Then I realized I would sleep most of the day, and my excitement
   disappeared. Sanderson agreed to drop us at the apartment and we said good
   night to Moberg, who was going off to look for his car. He'd forgotten
   where he'd left it, but he assured us it was no problem. "I'll find it by
   the smell," he said. "I can smell it for blocks." And he shuffled off down
   the street, a small figure in a dirty grey suit, sniffing for his car.

   Sanderson later explained that Moberg had first called Lotterman, who was
   not home, then Quinones, who was in Miami. Then he had called Segarra, who
   told him to sign a check for what he assumed would be small fines.
   Sanderson had been at Segarra's house, just ready to leave when Moberg
   called, and he had stopped by the court on his way home.

   "Damn good you did," I said. "We'd be back in that goddamn dungeon if you
   hadn't come."

   Yeamon and Sala mumbled agreement.

   "Enjoy it while you can," Sanderson replied. "You won't be out for long."

   We rode the rest of the way in silence. As we passed the Plaza Colon I
   heard the first sounds of morning -- a bus beginning its run, the shouts
   of early fruit peddlers -- and from somewhere up on the hill came the wail
   of a police siren.

   Nine

   After only a few hours of sleep, I was awakened by a great shout. It was
   Sala, sprung up as if from a nightmare. "Mother of balls!" he yelled. "The
   car! The vultures!"

   After a moment of confusion I remembered that we had left his car on the
   road near Casa Cabrones. The Puerto Ricans take a real interest in
   abandoned cars -- they set upon them like hungry animals and tear them
   apart. First go the hubcaps, then the wheels, then the bumpers and doors,
   and finally they haul away the carcass -- twenty or thirty of them, like
   ants dragging a dead beetle, hauling it off to some junk dealer for ten
   yanqui dollars, then fighting with knives and broken bottles for shares of
   the money.

   Yeamon woke up slowly, groaning with pain. Around his mouth was a crust of
   dried blood. He sat up on the mattress and stared at us.

   "Wake up," I said. "Your scooter's out there too."

   Sala swung his legs over the edge of the cot. "It's too late. They've had
   twelve hours -- Christ, they can strip a car in twelve minutes. We'll be
   lucky to find an oil spot."

   "Gone?" said Yeamon. He was still staring at us, not quite awake.

   I nodded. "Probably."

   "Well by God let's get out there!" he exclaimed, leaping off the mattress.
   "Catch 'em and smash a few teeth!"

   "No hurry," said Sala. "It's all over by now." He stood up and flexed his
   back. "Jesus, it feels like I've been stabbed." He came over to me.
   "What's wrong with my shoulder -- is that a knife hole back there?"

   "No," I told him. "Just a scrape -- maybe a fingernail."

   He cursed and went into the bathroom for a shower.

   Yeamon had already washed his face and was hurriedly getting dressed.
   "Let's hustle," he said. "We'll take a cab." He opened one of the windows
   and let in some light

   Reluctantly, I began to dress. There were bruises all over my body and it
   was painful to move. I wanted to go back to bed and sleep all day, but I
   could see there was no hope for it.

   We walked several blocks down to the Plaza Colon and got a cab. Yeamon
   told the driver where to go.

   I had never seen the city on a Sunday morning. Usually I got up about noon
   and went to Al's for a long breakfast. Now the streets were almost empty.
   There was no sign of the weekday chaos, the screech and roar of an army of
   salesmen careening through town in uninsured cars. The waterfront was
   nearly deserted, the stores were closed, and only the churches seemed to
   be doing any business. We passed several of them, and in front of each one
   was a colorful knot of people -- tan-skinned men and boys in freshly
   pressed suits, flowery women with veils, little girls in white dresses,
   and here and there a priest in a black robe and a tall black hat

   Then we sped across the long causeway to Condado. Things were different
   here. I saw no churches and the sidewalks were full of tourists in sandals
   and bright bermuda shorts. They streamed in and out of the big hotels,
   chattering, reading papers, carrying satchels, all wearing sunglasses and
   looking very busy.

   Yeamon mopped his face with a handkerchief. "Man," he said, "I don't think
   I can stand to lose that scooter. Jesus -- fired, beaten, arrested. . ."

   I nodded and Sala said nothing. He was leaning over the driver's shoulder,
   as if he expected at any moment to catch sight of a mob dismantling his
   car.

   After what seemed like hours we turned off the airport road and onto the
   narrow lane to Casa Cabrones. We were still several hundred yards away
   when I saw Sala's car. "There it is," I said, pointing up the road.

   "Christ," he muttered. "A miracle."

   As we pulled up to it I realized it was sitting on two coconut logs,
   instead of its wheels. They were gone, and so was Yeamon's scooter.

   Sala took it calmly. "Well -- better than I thought." He got into the car
   and checked around. "Nothing gone but the wheels -- damn lucky."

   Yeamon was in a rage. "I'll recognize that thing!" he shouted. "One of
   these days I'll catch somebody riding it."

   I was sure we were due for more trouble if we hung around Casa Cabrones.
   The thought of another beating made me nervous. I walked a few hundred
   feet toward the bar, looking to see if anyone was coming. It was closed
   and the parking lot was empty.

   On the way back to the car, I saw something red in the bushes beside the
   driveway. It was Yeamon's scooter, covered with a layer of palm fronds.
   Someone had hidden it, intending to pick it up later.

   I called him and he dragged it out. Nothing was missing. He kicked it over
   and it started perfectly. "Damn," he said. "I should sit here and wait for
   that punk to come back for it -- give him a little surprise."

   "Sure," I said. "Then spend the summer in La Princesa. Come on -- let's
   get out of here."

   Back at the car, Sala was figuring up the cost of four new tires and
   wheels. He looked very depressed.

   "Let's get some breakfast," said Yeamon. "I've got to have food."

   "Are you nuts?" Sala replied. "I can't leave this car -- they'll finish it
   off!" He reached into his wallet. "Here," he said to Yeamon. "Go down to
   that gas station and call the Fiat dealer and tell him to send four
   wheels. Here's his home phone -- tell him it's for Mr. Lotterman."

   Yeamon took the card and clattered off down the road. In a few minutes we
   heard him coming back. Then we sat for an hour until the wrecker arrived.
   To my surprise, the man had sent four wheels. We put them on, Sala signed
   Lotterman's name to a ticket, and then we drove in to the Long Beach Hotel
   for breakfast Yeamon followed on his scooter.

   The patio was crowded, so we sat inside at the snack bar. All around us
   were people I had spent ten years avoiding -- shapeless women in wool
   bathing suits, dull-eyed men with hairless legs and self-conscious laughs,
   all Americans, all fearsomely alike. These people should be kept at home,
   I thought; lock them in the basement of some goddamn Elks Club and keep
   them pacified with erotic movies; if they want a vacation, show them a
   foreign art film; and if they still aren't satisfied, send them into the
   wilderness and run them with vicious dogs.

   I glared at them, trying to eat the rotten breakfast the waitress had put
   in front of me -- slimy eggs, fat bacon and weak American coffee.

   "Goddamnit," I said. "This isn't Nedick's -- don't you have Puerto Rican
   coffee?"

   She shook her head.

   Sala went out and bought a Miami Herald. "I like this place," he said with
   a grin. "I like to sit up here and look down at the beach and think of all
   the good things I could do with a Luger."

   I put two dollars on the table and got up.

   "Where are you going?" Yeamon asked, looking up from a part of the paper
   he had taken from Sala.

   "I don't know," I said. "Probably Sanderson's. Anyplace where I can get
   away from these people."

   Sala looked up. "You and Sanderson are pretty good buddies," he said with
   a smile.

   I was too intent on leaving to pay any attention to him, but after I got
   out in the street I realized that he'd meant to be insulting. I guessed he
   was bitter because my bail was so much smaller than his. Hell with him, I
   thought. Sanderson had nothing to do with it.

   Several blocks up the street I stopped at an outdoor restaurant for some
   Puerto Rican coffee. I bought a New York Times for seventy cents. It made
   me feel better, reminding me that a big familiar world was going about its
   business just over the horizon. I had another cup of coffee and took the
   Times with me when I left, lugging it along the street like a precious
   bundle of wisdom, a weighty assurance that I was not yet cut off from that
   part of the world that was real.

   It took me a half hour to get to Sanderson's, but the walk was along the
   beach and I enjoyed it. When I got there I found him stretched out in his
   garden on a plastic sun pad. He looked thinner than he did when he was
   dressed.

   "Hello, slugger," he said. "How was jail?"

   "Horrible," I said.

   "Well," he replied, "next time it will be worse. You will be a marked
   man."

   I stared at him, wondering what sort of twisted humor he was practicing on
   me.

   Sanderson propped himself up on his elbows and lit a cigarette. "What
   started it?" he asked.

   I told him, deleting a few minor points here and there, categorically
   denying what little I knew of the official version.

   I leaned back in the chair, looking out at the white beach and the sea and
   the palms all around us, and thinking how strange it was to be worried
   about jail in a place like this. It seemed almost impossible that a man
   could go to the Caribbean and be put in jail for some silly misdemeanor.
   Puerto Rican jails were for Puerto Ricans -- not Americans who wore
   paisley ties and button-down shirts.

   "Why was your bail so much lower," he asked, "did they start the trouble?"

   Here it was again. I was beginning to wish they had charged me with
   something brutal, like "violent assault," or "mauling an officer."

   "Hell, I don't know," I said.

   "You're lucky," he said. "You can get a year in jail for resisting
   arrest."

   "Well," I said, trying to change the subject, "I think your speech saved
   the day -- they didn't seem very impressed when we said we worked for the
   News."

   He lit another cigarette. "No, that wouldn't impress anybody." He looked
   up again. "But don't think I lied for you. The Times is looking for a
   travel stringer down here and they asked me to find somebody. As of
   tomorrow, you're it."

   I shrugged. "Fine."

   I went inside for another drink. While I was in the kitchen I heard a car
   drive up. It was Segarra, dressed like some gigolo on the Italian Riviera.
   He nodded stiffly as he came through the door. "Good afternoon, Paul. What
   was all the trouble last night?"

   "I don't remember," I said, pouring my drink down the sink. "Get Hal to
   tell you. I have to go."

   He gave me a disapproving glance, then went through the house to the
   garden. I went to the door to tell Sanderson I was leaving.

   "Come by the office tomorrow," he said. "We'll talk about your new job."

   Segarra looked puzzled.

   Sanderson smiled at him. "Stealing another one of your boys," he said.

   Segarra frowned and sat down. "Fine. Take all of them."

   I left and walked out to Calle Modesto, wondering how to kill the rest of
   the day. It was always a problem. Sunday was my day off and usually I had
   Saturday too. But I was getting tired of riding around with Sala or
   sitting at Al's, and there was nothing else to do. I wanted to get out on
   the island, look at some of the other towns, but for that I needed a car.

   Not just a car, I thought, I need an apartment too. It was a hot afternoon
   and I was tired and sore. I wanted to sleep, or at least rest, but there
   was no place to go. I walked for several blocks, ambling along in the
   shade of the big flamboyan trees, thinking of all the things I might be
   doing in New York or London, cursing the warped impulse that had brought
   me to this dull and steaming rock, and finally I stopped at a native bar
   to get a beer. I paid for the bottle and took it with me, sipping it as I
   walked along the street I wondered where I could sleep. Sala's apartment
   was out of the question. It was hot and noisy and depressing as a tomb.
   Maybe Yeamon's, I thought, but it was too far out and there was no way to
   get there. When I finally faced the fact that I had no choice but to walk
   the streets, I decided to start looking for my own apartment -- a place
   where I could relax by myself and have my own refrigerator and make my own
   drinks and maybe even take a girl once in a while. The idea of having my
   own bed in my own apartment cheered me so much that I felt anxious to be
   rid of this day and get on to the next, so I could begin looking.

   I realized that to tie myself down with an apartment and perhaps a car was
   more of a commitment than I wanted to make right now -- especially since I
   might be hauled off to jail at any moment, or the paper might fold, or I
   might get a letter from some old friend about a job in Buenos Aires. Just
   yesterday, for that matter, I'd been ready to go to Mexico City.

   But I knew I was coming to a point where I would have to make up my mind
   about Puerto Rico. I had been here three months and it seemed like three
   weeks. So far, there was nothing to get hold of, none of the real pros and
   cons I had found in other places. All the while I had been in San Juan I'd
   condemned it without really disliking it I felt that sooner or later I
   would see that third dimension, that depth that makes a city real and that
   you never see until you've been there awhile. But the longer I stayed, the
   more I came to suspect that for the first time in my life I had come to a
   place where this vital dimension didn't exist, or was too nebulous to make
   any difference. Maybe, God forbid, the place was what it appeared to be --
   a melange of Okies and thieves and bewildered jibaros.

   I walked for more than a mile, thinking, smoking, sweating, peering over
   tall hedges and into low windows on the street, listening to the roar of
   the buses and the constant barking of stray dogs, seeing almost no one but
   the people who passed me in crowded autos, heading for God knows where --
   whole families jammed in cars, just driving around the city, honking,
   yelling, stopping now and then to buy pastillos and a shot of coco frio,
   then getting back in the car and moving on, forever looking, wondering,
   marveling at all the fine things the yanquis were doing to the city: Here
   was an office building going up, ten stories tall -- here was a new
   highway, leading nowhere -- and of course there were always the new hotels
   to look at, or you could watch the yanqui women on the beach -- and at
   night, if you arrived early enough to get a good seat, there was
   television in the public squares.

   I kept walking, more frustrated with every step. Finally, in desperation,
   I hailed a cab and went to the Caribe Hilton, where they were staging an
   international tennis tournament. I used my press card to get in and sat in
   the stands the rest of the afternoon.

   The sun didn't bother me here. It seemed to belong with the clay courts
   and the gin and the white ball zipping back and forth. I remembered other
   tennis courts and long-gone days full of sun and gin and people I would
   never see again because we could no longer talk to each other without
   sounding dull and disappointed. I sat there in the grandstand, hearing the
   swack of the furry ball and knowing it would never sound like it did on
   those days when I knew who was playing, and cared.

   The match was over at dusk and I took a cab up to Al's. Sala was there,
   sitting alone at a corner table. I saw Sweep on the way to the patio and
   told him to bring two rums and three hamburgers. Sala looked up as I
   approached.

   "You have that fugitive look," he said. "A man on the run."

   "I talked to Sanderson," I said. "He thinks it may not come to court -- or
   if it does it might take three years."

   The moment I said this I regretted it. Now we would get into the subject
   of my bail again. Before he could reply I held up my hands. "Forget it," I
   said. "Let's talk about something else."

   He shrugged. "Christ, I can't think of anything that isn't depressing or
   threatening. I feel hemmed in by disaster."

   "Where's Yeamon?" I asked.

   "He went home," he replied. "Right after you left he remembered Chenault
   was still locked in the hut."

   Sweep arrived with our drinks and food and I took them off the tray.

   "I think he's crazy as a loon," Sala exclaimed.

   "You're right," I replied. "God knows how he'll end up. You can't just go
   through life like that -- never giving an inch, anytime, anywhere."

   Just then Bill Donovan, the sports editor, came howling up to the table.

   "Here they are!" he shouted. "The gentlemen of the press -- sneak
   drinkers!" He laughed happily. "You fuckers really tied one on last night,
   eh? Man, you're lucky Lotterman went to Ponce!" He sat down at the table.
   "What happened? I hear you had it out with the cops."

   "Yeah," I said. "Beat the piss out of 'em -- real laughs."

   "Goddamnit," he said, "Sorry I missed it. I love a good fight --
   especially with cops."

   We talked for a while. I liked Donovan, but he was forever talking about
   getting back to San Francisco, "where things are happening." He made it
   sound so good on the Coast that I knew he had to be lying, but I could
   never tell just where the truth ended and the lies began. If even half of
   what he said was true, then I wanted to go there immediately; but with
   Donovan I couldn't even count on that necessary half, and listening to him
   was always frustrating.

   We left about midnight and walked down the hill in silence. The night was
   muggy, and all around me I felt the same pressure, a sense of time rushing
   by while it seemed to be standing still. Whenever I thought of time in
   Puerto Rico, I was reminded of those old magnetic clocks that hung on the
   walls of my classrooms in high school. Every now and then a hand would not
   move for several minutes -- and if I watched it long enough, wondering if
   it had finally broken down, the sudden click of the hand jumping three or
   four notches would startle me when it came.

   Ten

   Sanderson's office was on the top floor of the tallest building in the Old
   City. I sat in a leather lounge chair, and below me I could see the entire
   waterfront, the Caribe Hilton and most of Condado. There was a definite
   feeling of being in a control tower.

   Sanderson had his feet on the window sill. "Two things," he was saying.
   "This business with the Times won't amount to much -- a few articles a
   year -- but Zimburger's project is a big one."

   "Zimburger?" I said.

   He nodded. "I didn't want to mention it yesterday because he might have
   dropped in."

   "Wait a minute," I said. "Are we talking about the same Zimburger -- the
   General?"

   He looked annoyed. "That's right, he's one of our clients."

   "Damn," I said. "Business must be falling off. The man's a jackass."

   He rolled a pencil in his fingers. "Kemp," he said slowly, "Mister
   Zimburger is building a marina -- a damn big one." He paused. "He's also
   going to build one of the finest hotels on the island."

   I laughed and fell back in the chair.

   "Look," he said sharply, "you've been here long enough to begin learning a
   few things, and one of the first things you should learn is that money
   comes in odd packages." He tapped his pencil on the desk. "Zimburger --
   known to you as 'the jackass' -- could buy and sell you thirty times. If
   you insist on going by appearances you'd be better off in some place like
   Texas."

   I laughed again. "You may be right. Now why don't you tell me what you
   have in mind. I'm in a hurry."

   "One of these days," he said, "this silly arrogance of yours is going to
   cost you a lot of money."

   "Goddamnit," I replied, "I didn't come here to be analyzed."

   He smiled stiffly. "All right. The Times wants a general article for their
   spring travel section. Mrs. Ludwig will get some material together for you
   -- I'll tell her what you need."

   "What do they want?" I said. "A thousand happy words?"

   "More or less," he replied. "We'll handle the photos."

   "Okay," I said. "That's a back-breaker -- now what about Zimburger?"

   "Well," he said. "Mister Zimburger wants a brochure. He's building a
   marina on Vieques island, between here and St. Thomas. We'll get the
   photos and do the layout -- you write the text, about fifteen hundred
   words."

   "What will he pay?" I asked.

   "He won't," Sanderson replied. "He'll pay us a flat fee -- we'll pay you
   twenty-five dollars a day, plus expenses. You'll have to make a trip to
   Vieques, probably with Zimburger."

   "Jesus," I said.

   He smiled. "No real hurry. Let's say next Friday."

   "The brochure will be aimed at investors," he added. "This is one hell of
   a big marina -- two hotels, a hundred cottages, the whole works."

   "Where did Zimburger get his money?" I asked.

   He shook his head. "It's not just Zimburger. He has several people with
   him on this -- as a matter of fact, he asked me in on it."

   "What stopped you?"

   He swung around to face the window again. "I'm not ready to retire yet.
   This is a pretty interesting place to work."

   "I'll bet it is," I said. "What's your cut here -- ten percent of every
   dollar invested on the island?"

   He grinned. "You think like a mercenary, Paul. We're here to help, to keep
   the wheels turning."

   I got up to go. "I'll come by tomorrow and pick up the stuff."

   "How about lunch?" he said, looking at his watch. "It's about that time."

   "Sorry," I said. "I have to run."

   He smiled. "Late for work?"

   "That's right," I said. "I have to get back and work on an expose."

   "Don't let your boy scout ethics run away with you," he said, still
   smiling. "Oh yes -- while we're on the subject of scouts, tell your friend
   Yeamon to stop by when he gets a chance. I have something for him."

   I nodded. "Put him to work with Zimburger. They'd get along fine."

   When I got back to the office Sala called me over to his desk and showed
   me a copy of El Diario. On the front page was a picture of the three of
   us. I hardly recognized myself -- slit-eyed, sneaky-looking, hunched on
   the bench like a hardened criminal. Sala looked drunk and Yeamon looked
   like a maniac.

   "When did they get this?" I said.

   "I don't remember," he replied. "But they damn well got it."

   Underneath the photo was a small story. "What's it say?" I asked.

   "Same thing the cop said," he replied. "We'll be lucky if we aren't
   lynched."

   "Has Lotterman said anything?"

   "He's still in Ponce."

   I was beginning to get the fear. "You better carry a gun," Moberg advised
   me. "They'll be after you now. I know those swine -- they'll try to kill
   you." By six o'clock I was so depressed that I gave up trying to work, and
   went to Al's.

   Just as I turned onto Calle O'Leary I heard Yeamon's scooter approaching
   from the opposite direction. It made a hellish sound in those narrow
   streets and you could hear it six blocks away. We arrived in front of Al's
   at the same time. Chenault was riding on the back, and she hopped off
   while he cut the engine. They both seemed drunk. On the way back to the
   patio we ordered hamburgers and rum.

   "Things are getting worse," I said, pulling up a chair for Chenault.

   Yeamon scowled. "That bastard Lotterman dodged the hearing today. It was a
   hell of a thing -- those people at the Labor Department saw our picture in
   El Diario. I'm sort of glad Lotterman didn't show. He might have won
   today."

   "No wonder," I said. "That was a very ugly photograph." I shook my head.
   "Lotterman's in Ponce -- we're lucky."

   "Damnit," he said. "I need that money this weekend. We're going over to
   St. Thomas for the carnival."

   "Oh yeah," I said. "I've heard about that -- it's supposed to be pretty
   wild."

   "I've heard it's wonderful!" Chenault exclaimed. "It's supposed to be as
   good as the one in Trinidad."

   "Why don't you come with us?" Yeamon suggested. "Tell Lotterman you want
   to do the story."

   "I'd like to," I said. "San Juan is driving me nuts."

   Yeamon started to say something, but Chenault cut him off. "What time is
   it?" she said anxiously.

   I looked at my watch. "Almost seven."

   She quickly stood up. "I have to go -- it starts at seven." She picked up
   her purse and started toward the door. "I'll be back in an hour," she
   called. "Don't get too drunk."

   I looked at Yeamon.

   "There's some kind of a ceremony going on at the big cathedral," he said
   wearily. "God only knows what it is, but she has to see it."

   I smiled and shook my head.

   He nodded. "Yeah, it's hell. I'm damned if I know what to do with her."

   "Do with her?" I said.

   "Yeah, I've about decided this place is rotten to the core and I should
   get out."

   "Oh," I said. "That reminds me. Sanderson has some kind of work for you --
   writing travel articles. His integrity demands that he justify what he
   said about us the other night."

   He groaned. "Christ, travel articles. How low can a man fall?"

   "Figure that out with Sanderson," I said. "He wants you to call him."

   He leaned back and stared at the wall, saying nothing for several moments.
   "His integrity," he said finally, as if he'd been dissecting the word. "It
   seems to me that a guy like Sanderson has about as much integrity as a
   Judas Goat."

   I sipped my drink.

   "What makes you deal with a guy like that?" he asked. "You're always going
   over there -- is there something to him that I can't see?"

   "I don't know," I said. "What do you see?"

   "Not much," he replied. "I know what Sala says -- he claims he's queer --
   and of course he's a phony and a prick and God knows what else." He
   paused. "But Sala just tosses words around: Phony, Prick, Queer -- so
   what? I'm curious as to what the hell you see in the guy."

   Now I understood Sala's crack at breakfast the other day. And I felt that
   whatever I said about Sanderson now would be crucial -- not for Sanderson,
   but for me. Because I knew why I dealt with him and most of my reasons
   were pretty small -- he was in and I was out, and he looked like a pretty
   good pipeline to a lot of things I wanted. On the other hand, there was
   something about him that I liked. Perhaps it was Sanderson's struggle with
   himself that fascinated me -- the hardnose man of the world, gradually
   blotting out the boy from Kansas. I remembered him telling me that the Hal
   Sanderson from Kansas had died when his train got to New York -- and any
   man who can say a thing like that, and attempt to say it with pride, is
   worth listening to unless you have something a hell of a lot better to do
   with your time.

   Yeamon's voice snapped me out of my pondering. "Okay," he said with a wave
   of his hand, "if you give it that much thought there's bound to be
   something to it, but I still think he's rotten."

   "You think too much," I said.

   "Got to think all the time," he muttered. "That's my trouble -- I take
   vacations from thinking." He nodded. "It works out the same way as all the
   other vacations -- you relax for two weeks, then spend fifty weeks making
   up for it."

   "I don't quite follow you," I said.

   He smiled. "You interrupted me. We were talking about Chenault -- and all
   of a sudden you brought up the Judas Goat."

   "Okay," I said. "What about her? Is this your way of saying you're going
   to leave her with me?"

   He tapped the table with his fingers. "Kemp, I'd rather you wouldn't say
   things like that. I'm pretty square when it comes to trading girls around,
   especially a girl I like." He said it calmly, but I could hear the edge in
   his voice.

   I shook my head. "You're an inconsistent bastard -- that's the last thing
   I'd expect to hear from you."

   "I'm not much on consistency," he said, talking easily again. "No, I was
   just thinking out loud -- I don't do that very often."

   "I know," I said.

   He sipped his drink. "I spent all day yesterday thinking," he said. "I
   should leave this place, and I don't know what to do about Chenault."

   "Where do you figure on going?" I asked.

   He shrugged. "I don't know -- maybe down the islands, maybe Europe."

   "Europe's not bad," I said. "If you have a job."

   "I won't," he said.

   "No," I agreed. "You probably won't."

   "That's what I was thinking about," he said. "And I wondered why the hell
   I wanted to go to Europe, anyway -- why should I?"

   I shrugged. "Why not?"

   "You know," said Yeamon, "I haven't been home in three years, but the last
   time I was there, I spent a lot of time in the woods."

   "You're losing me again," I said. "I don't even know where you're from."

   "A place called London, Kentucky," he said. "Laurel County -- a fine place
   to disappear."

   "You planning on disappearing?" I asked.

   He nodded. "Could be. Not in Laurel County, though." He paused. "My father
   decided to play games with his money, and we lost the farm."

   I lit a cigarette.

   "It was a fine place," he said. "A man could go out there and shoot all
   day and run his dogs and raise all manner of hell, and not a soul in the
   world would bother him."

   "Yeah," I said. "I did some hunting around St. Louis."

   He leaned back and stared into his drink. "I got to thinking about that
   yesterday, and it gave me the idea that I might be on the wrong track."

   "How's that?" I said.

   "I'm not sure," he replied. "But I have a feeling that I'm following a
   course that somebody laid out a long time ago -- and I have one hell of a
   lot of company."

   I looked up at the plantain tree and let him go on.

   "You're the same way," he said. "We're all going to the same damn places,
   doing the same damn things people have been doing for fifty years, and we
   keep waiting for something to happen." He looked up. "You know -- I'm a
   rebel, I took off -- now where's my reward?"

   "You fool," I said. "There is no reward and there never was."

   "Jesus," he said. "That's horrible." He raised the bottle to his lips and
   finished it off. "We're just drunkards," he said, "helpless drunkards. To
   hell with it -- I'll go back to some Godforsaken little town and be a
   fireman."

   I laughed, and just then Chenault came back. We sat in the patio and drank
   for several hours until Yeamon stood up and said they were going home.
   "Think about that St. Thomas thing," he said. "We might as well play the
   game while we can."

   "Why not?" I muttered. "I'll probably go. Might be the last fun I'll
   have."

   Chenault waved goodbye and followed Yeamon out to the street.

   I sat there for a while, but it was too depressing. Between Yeamon's talk
   and my picture in El Diario, I was beginning to feel suicidal. My skin
   felt creepy and I began to wonder if maybe all this drinking was getting
   the best of me. Then I remembered a story the News had run last week about
   an epidemic of parasites in the local water supply, little worms that
   destroy the intestines. Jesus, I thought, I better get out of here. I paid
   my tab and bolted out to the street and looked up and down, wondering
   where I could go. I was afraid to walk, for fear of being recognized and
   beaten by an angry mob -- but the thought of going home to the nest of
   fleas and poison crab lice I had been sleeping in for three months filled
   me with terror. Finally, I took a cab to the Caribe Hilton. I sat at the
   bar for an hour or so, hoping to meet a girl who'd invite me up to her
   room, but the only person I met was a football coach from Atlanta who
   wanted me to walk on the beach. I told him I would, but first I had to
   borrow a meat-whip from the kitchen.

   "What for?" he asked.

   I stared at him. "Don't you want to be flogged?"

   He laughed nervously.

   "You wait here," I said. "I'll get the whip." I got up and went to the
   restroom, and when I returned he was gone.

   There were no girls in the bar -- only middle-aged women and bald men in
   dinner jackets. I was shaking. Jesus, I thought, maybe I'm getting the
   DTs. I drank as fast as I could, trying to get drunk. More and more people
   seemed to be staring at me. But I couldn't speak. I felt lonely and
   exposed. I stumbled out to the street and flagged a cab. I was too crazed
   to check into a hotel. There was no place to go but that filthy
   roach-infested apartment. It was the only home I had.

   I turned on the lights and opened the windows, then I made a large drink
   and stretched out on the cot to read my magazine. There was a faint
   breeze, but the noise from the street was so terrible that I gave up
   trying to read and turned out the lights. People kept passing on the
   sidewalk and looking in, and now that they couldn't see me I expected
   looters to come crawling through the window at any moment I lay back on
   the cot with a bottle of rum resting on my navel and plotted how to defend
   myself.

   If I had a Luger, I thought, I could drill the bastards. I leaned on one
   elbow and pointed a finger at the window, seeing what kind of a shot I
   would get. Perfect. There was just enough light in the street for a good
   silhouette. I knew it would happen quickly, I'd have no choice: just pull
   the trigger and go deaf from the terrible noise, a frenzy of screaming and
   scratching followed by the ghastly thump of a body knocked back and down
   to the sidewalk. There would be a mob, of course, and I'd probably have to
   shoot a few in self-defense. Then the cops would arrive and that would be
   it. They'd recognize me and probably kill me right there in the apartment.

   Jesus, I thought, I'm doomed. I'll never get out of here alive.

   I thought I saw things moving on the ceiling and voices in the alley were
   calling my name. I began to tremble and sweat, and then I fell into a
   twisted delirium.

   Eleven

   That night finished me with Sala's tomb. The next morning I got up early
   and went out to Condado to seek an apartment I wanted sunlight and clean
   sheets and a refrigerator where I could keep beer and orange juice, food
   in the pantry and books on the shelves so I could stay home once in a
   while, a breeze coming in through the window and a peaceful street
   outside, an address that sounded human-instead of c/o or Gen. Del. or
   Please Forward or Hold for Arrival.

   A ten-year accumulation of these vagrant addresses can weigh on a man like
   a hex. He begins to feel like the Wandering Jew. That's the way I felt.
   After one night too many sleeping on some stinking cot in a foul grotto
   where I didn't want to be anyway and had no reason to be except that it
   was foreign and cheap, I decided to hell with it. If that was absolute
   freedom then I'd had a bellyful of it, and from here on in I would try
   something a little less pure and one hell of a lot more comfortable. I was
   not only going to have an address, but I was going to have a car, and if
   there was anything else to be had in the way of large and stabilizing
   influences, I would have those too.

   There were several apartments advertised in the paper, but the first few I
   looked at were too expensive. Finally I found one over somebody's garage.
   It was just what I wanted -- plenty of air, a big flamboyan tree for
   shade, bamboo furniture and a new refrigerator.

   The woman wanted a hundred, but when I said seventy-five she quickly
   agreed. I had seen a big "51" sticker on a car in front of her house and
   she told me that she and her husband were going all out for statehood.
   They owned La Bomba Cafe in San Juan. Did I know it? Indeed I did -- knew
   it well, ate there often, incomparable food for the price. I told her I
   worked for the New York Times and would be in San Juan for a year, writing
   a series of stories about statehood for Puerto Rico. For this, I would
   need absolute privacy.

   We grinned at each other and I gave her a month's rent in advance. When
   she asked for another seventy-five on deposit I told her I'd get my
   expense check next week and would pay her then. She smiled graciously and
   I left before she could dun me for anything else.

   Knowing I had a place of my own cheered me immensely. Even if I was fired
   I had enough in the bank to rest for a while, and with Sanderson shelling
   out twenty-five bills a day I would have no worries at all.

   I walked out to Avenida Ashford and took a bus to the office. Halfway
   there, I remembered that this was my day off, but I wanted to check my
   mail so I went in. As I crossed the newsroom toward the mail slots, Sala
   called me from the darkroom.

   "Man," he said, "you should have been here earlier. Lotterman found out
   about Moberg signing that check for our bail-tried to croak him with a
   pair of scissors, chased him all the way down to the street." He nodded.
   "It was hell. I thought Moberg was a goner."

   "Good God," I muttered. "What about the check -- is it still good?"

   "I guess so," he replied. "He'll lose face if it bounces."

   I nodded doubtfully. This screwed my plan to get a car. I was going to
   borrow money from Lotterman and pay it back out of my salary at ten or
   fifteen a week. I was standing there by the darkroom, racking my brain for
   alternatives, when Lotterman popped out of his office and called me.

   "I want to see you," he barked. "You too, Sala -- don't try to duck back
   in there."

   Sala ignored him and went into the darkroom. Seconds later he appeared
   with a pack of cigarettes. "Duck, hell!" he snorted, loud enough for
   Lotterman and everybody else to hear. "The day I have to duck a punk like
   that I'll toss in the towel."

   As it happened, Lotterman heard nothing. I had never seen him in such a
   state. He tried to sound angry, but he seemed more confused than anything
   else, and after listening to him for a few moments I had the impression
   that he was on the verge of dissolving into some kind of apoplexy.

   He started off by telling us what a terrible thing it was for "that
   goddamn crazy Yeamon" to get us into trouble. "And then Moberg," he said
   with a groan. "Moberg, that crazy worthless sot, he's been stealing from
   me." He whacked the desk with his fist. "That sleazy drunken cockroach of
   a man who goes out and puts the slam on me for twenty-three hundred
   dollars!" He stared up at us. "Can you boys understand what that does to
   my bank balance? Do you have any idea what it costs to keep this paper
   going?" He fell back in the chair. "Good Lord, I've put my life savings on
   the line for the simple reason that I believe in journalism -- and here
   this odious, pus-filled roach goes out and tries to destroy me with one
   blow.

   "And Yeamon!" he shouted. "I knew it the minute I saw him! I said to
   myself, Christ, get rid of this guy quick -- he's pure trouble." He shook
   a warning finger at us. "I want you to stay away from him, understand?
   What the hell is he doing here anyway? Why doesn't he go back where he
   came from? What's he living on?"

   We both shrugged. "I think he has a trust fund," I said. "He's been
   talking about investing some money."

   "God almighty!" Lotterman exclaimed. "That's just the kind we don't want
   here!" He shook his head. "And he had the nerve to tell me he was broke --
   borrowed a hundred dollars and threw it away on a motorcycle -- can you
   beat that?"

   I couldn't beat it and neither could Sala.

   "Now he's hounding me for blood money," Lotterman went on. "By God, we'll
   see." He slumped back in the chair again. "It's almost too horrible to
   believe," he said. "I've just paid a thousand dollars to get him out of
   jail -- a dangerous nut who threatened to twist my head. And Moberg," he
   muttered. "Where did he come from?" He shook his head and waved us out of
   the office. "Go on," he said. "Tell Moberg I'm going to have him locked
   up."

   As we started to go he remembered something else. "Wait a minute," he
   called. "I don't want you boys to think I wouldn't have got you out of
   jail. Of course I would -- you know that, don't you?"

   We assured him that we did, and left him mumbling at his desk. I went back
   to the library and sat down to think. I was going to have a car,
   regardless of what I had to do to get it. I'd seen a Volkswagen
   convertible for five hundred and it seemed in pretty good shape.
   Considering the fantastic price of cars in San Juan, it would be a real
   bargain if I could get it for four hundred.

   I called Sanderson. "Say," I said casually, "what's the least I'll get out
   of this Zimburger deal?"

   "Why?" he asked.

   "I want an advance. I need a car."

   He laughed. "You don't need a car -- you want a car. How much do you
   need?"

   "About a thousand," I said. "I'm not greedy."

   "You must be out of your mind," he replied. "The best I could do under any
   circumstances would be two fifty."

   "Okay," I said. "It's a drop in the bucket, but it might help. When can I
   get it?"

   "Tomorrow morning," he said. "Zimburger's coming in and I think we should
   get together and set this thing up. I don't want to do it at home." He
   paused. "Can you come in around ten?"

   "Okay," I said. "See you then."

   When I put down the phone I realized I was preparing to make the plunge. I
   would move into my own apartment at the end of the week, and now I was
   about to buy a car. San Juan was getting a grip on me. I hadn't had a car
   in five years -- not since the old Citroen I bought in Paris for
   twenty-five dollars, and sold a year later for ten, after driving it all
   over Europe. Now I was ready to shoot four hundred on a Volkswagen. If
   nothing else, it gave me a sense of moving up in the world, for good or
   ill.

   On my way to Sanderson's the next day I stopped at the lot where I'd seen
   the car. The office was empty, and on a wall above one of the desks was a
   sign saying "SELL -- NOTHING HAPPENS UNTIL SOMEBODY SELLS SOMETHING."

   I found the dealer outside. "Get this one ready to go," I said, pointing
   to the convertible. "I'll give you four hundred for it at noon."

   He shook his head. "Five hundred dollars," he said, lifting the sign on
   the windshield as if I'd overlooked it.

   "Nonsense," I replied. "You know the rules -- nothing happens until
   somebody sells something."

   He looked surprised, but the slogan had registered.

   "The fat is in the fire," I said, turning to go. "I'll be back at noon to
   pick it up."

   He stared after me as I hurried out to the street

   Zimburger was already there when I got to Sanderson's office. He was
   wearing a bright blue suit and a red shirt with no tie. At a glance, he
   looked like a wax dummy in the window of some moldy PX. After twenty years
   in The Corps, Zimburger felt uneasy in civilian clothes. "Too damn baggy,"
   he explained. "Cheap workmanship, flimsy material."

   He nodded emphatically. "Nobody keeps an eye on things anymore. It's the
   law of the tooth and the fang."

   Sanderson came in from the outer office. He was dressed, as usual, like
   the resident governor of Pago Pago. This time he was wearing a black silk
   suit with a bow tie.

   Zimburger looked like an off-duty prison guard, a sweating potbellied vet
   who had somehow scraped up a wad of money.

   "All right," he said. "Let's get down to business. Is this guy the
   writer?" He pointed at me.

   "This is Paul Kemp," said Sanderson. "You've seen him at the house."

   Zimburger nodded. "Yeah, I know."

   "Mr. Kemp writes for the New York Times," said Sanderson. "We're lucky to
   have him with us on this."

   Zimburger looked at me with renewed interest. "A real writer, eh? I guess
   that means trouble." He laughed. "I knew writers in the Marines -- they
   were all trouble. Hell, I used to be one myself. They had me writing
   training manuals for six months -- dullest damn work I ever did."

   Sanderson leaned back in his chair and put his feet on the desk.

   "Kemp will go over to Vieques with you whenever it's convenient," he said.
   "He wants to look at the site."

   "Hell yes!" Zimburger replied. "It'll knock his eyes out-not a better
   beach in the Caribbean." He turned to me. "You'll get some real material
   out of this place. Nobody's ever done a story on Vieques -- especially the
   New York Times."

   "Sounds good," I said. "When do you want to go?"

   "How about tomorrow?" he said quickly.

   "Too soon," Sanderson told him. "Kemp is doing a job for the News right
   now. Why not make it this weekend?"

   "Fine with me," Zimburger replied. "I'll line up a plane for Thursday." He
   looked at his watch and stood up. "I'm off," he said. "Hell, it's almost
   noon and I haven't made any money -- wasted half the day." He looked at me
   and gave me a snappy salute, grinning as he hurried out the door.

   I took a crowded elevator down to the street and hailed a cab. At the car
   lot the salesman was waiting for me. I greeted him cordially and paid him
   in cash for the car and quickly drove it away. It was yellow, with a black
   top and good tires and an AM/FM radio.

   It was almost one, so I went straight to the paper instead of stopping at
   Al's for lunch.

   I spent all afternoon at police headquarters, talking to a man who had
   killed his daughter.

   "Why?" I asked him, as several cops looked on and Sala snapped his
   picture.

   He yelled something in Spanish and the cops told me he thought his
   daughter was "no good." She wanted to go to New York. She was only
   thirteen, but he claimed she'd been whoring for the price of a plane
   ticket

   "Okay," I said. "Muchas gracias." I had enough for a story and the cops
   took him away. I wondered how long he would stay in jail before the trial.
   Probably two or three years, considering he'd already confessed. Hell,
   what was the sense of a trial; the docket was crowded enough.

   And a damn good thing it is, I thought. All afternoon I had a feeling that
   cops were giving us the eye, but I couldn't be sure.

   We went up to Al's for dinner. Yeamon was there in the patio and I told
   him about Lotterman's outburst

   "Yeah," he said. "I thought about that on the way in to see the lawyer."
   He shook his head. "Hell, I didn't even go. He has me now -- did he say
   anything about canceling my bail?"

   "He won't," said Sala. "It would make him look bad -- unless he figures
   you're about to skip out"

   "I am," said Yeamon. "We're going to South America."

   "Both of you?" I said.

   He nodded. "We may have to wait awhile now," he said. "I was counting on
   that severance money."

   "Did you call Sanderson?" I asked.

   He shook his head.

   "Call him," I said. "He has green money. I bought a new car today."

   He laughed. "I'll be damned. Is it here?"

   "Hell yes," I said. We went out to the street to look at the car. Yeamon
   agreed that it had a fine, sporting appearance.

   "But you know what it means," he said with a grin. "You're hooked. First a
   job, then a car -- pretty soon you'll get married and settle in for good."
   He laughed. "You'll get like old Robert -- always going to take off
   manana."

   "Don't worry," Sala replied. "I'll know when to take off. When you get to
   be a working pro, then come back and tell me how to manage my life."

   We started back inside. "What's a working pro, Robert?" Yeamon asked.
   "Somebody who has a job?"

   "Somebody who can get a job," Sala replied. "Because he knows what he's
   doing."

   Yeamon thought for a minute. "You mean because he knows what somebody else
   wants done?"

   Sala shrugged. "Say it however you want."

   "I did," said Yeamon. "And I don't mean to knock your talents. But if
   you're as good as you say you are, and if you hate San Juan as much as you
   claim to, it seems to me like you'd put two and two together, and be a
   working pro in a place you liked."

   "Mind your own fucking business!" Sala snapped. "I don't see that kind of
   logic in the way you live -- you get straight with yourself, then I'll pay
   you for professional counsel, okay?"

   "For God's sake," I said. "Let's forget this crap."

   "Suits me," said Sala. "We're all fuck-ups anyway -- except that I'm a
   pro."

   Sweep brought a tray of hamburgers.

   "When are you taking off?" I asked Yeamon.

   "Depends on the money," he replied. "I thought I'd check out St. Thomas
   this weekend, see if we can get a hop on one of those boats going south."
   He looked up. "You still coming with us?"

   "Ah, Christ," I exclaimed. I told him about Zimburger and Vieques. "I
   could have put it off," I said, "but all I could think about was getting
   that money and the car."

   "Hell," he said. "Vieques is halfway between here and St. Thomas. There's
   a ferry every day."

   We finally agreed that I'd meet them there on Friday. They were flying
   over in the morning and planned to come back sometime Sunday night.

   "Stay away from St Thomas," said Sala. "Bad things happen to people in St.
   Thomas. I can tell you some incredibly horrible stories."

   "So what?" said Yeamon. "It's a good drunk. You should come with us."

   "No thanks," Sala replied. "We had our good drunk, remember? I can do
   without those beatings."

   We finished our food and ordered more drinks. Yeamon started talking about
   South America and I felt a reluctant excitement flicker somewhere inside
   me. Even Sala got excited. "Christ, I'd like to go there," he kept saying.
   "No reason why I can't. Hell, I can make a living anywhere."

   I listened and didn't say much, because I remembered how I'd felt that
   morning. And besides, I had a car in the street and an apartment in
   Condado and a golden tap on Zimburger. I thought about that. The car and
   the apartment didn't bother me at all, but the fact that I was working for
   Zimburger gave me the creeps. Yeamon's talk made it seem even worse. They
   were going to South America, and I was going to Zimburger. It gave me a
   strange feeling, and the rest of that night I didn't say much, but merely
   sat there and drank, trying to decide if I was getting older and wiser, or
   just plain old.

   The thing that disturbed me most was that I really didn't want to go to
   South America. I didn't want to go anywhere. Yet, when Yeamon talked about
   moving on, I felt the excitement anyway. I could see myself getting off a
   boat in Martinique and ambling into town to look for a cheap hotel. I
   could see myself in Caracas and Bogota and Rio, wheeling and dealing
   through a world I had never seen but knew I could handle because I was a
   champ.

   But it was pure masturbation, because down in my gut I wanted nothing more
   than a clean bed and a bright room and something solid to call my own at
   least until I got tired of it. There was an awful suspicion in my mind
   that I'd finally gone over the hump, and the worst thing about it was that
   I didn't feel tragic at all, but only weary, and sort of comfortably
   detached.

   Twelve

   The next morning I drove down to Fajardo at top speed. I was covering a
   real estate deal, but it turned into an ugly experience and I was forced
   to abandon it. On the way back I stopped at a roadside stand and bought a
   pineapple, which the man cut up into little cubes for me. I ate them as I
   labored through traffic, driving slowly now, with one hand, reveling in
   the luxury of being master of my own movements for a change.

   Next weekend, I decided, I would drive over to Ponce on the south coast.
   When I got to the News building, Moberg was just getting out of his car.

   "I trust you're armed," I said. "Old daddio may run off his nut when he
   sees you."

   He laughed. "We compromised. He made me sign a note, saying I'd give him
   my car if anybody skipped."

   "Jesus," I said. "Yeamon's already talking about leaving."

   He laughed again. "I don't care. Fuck him. I'll sign anything. It's the
   right thing to do."

   "Ah, Moberg," I said, "you're a nutty bastard."

   "Yes," he said. "I'm about as nutty as they come."

   Lotterman didn't show up all afternoon. Sala claimed he was making the
   rounds of the banks, trying to float a loan to keep the paper going. It
   was only a rumor, but everyone in the office was talking as if the end had
   come.

   About three, Yeamon called to say he'd been to see Sanderson. "He gave me
   a few shitty articles to do," he said. "Says he'll get me about thirty
   bucks apiece for them -- wouldn't give me an advance, though."

   "That's not bad," I said. "Do a good job on those and demand something
   bigger -- he has more money than God."

   "Yeah," he muttered. "I guess so. If I could get one thing worth about
   five hundred, I'd have enough to take off."

   Sanderson called an hour or so later. "Can you be at the airport by seven
   on Thursday morning?" he asked.

   "Good God," I said. "I suppose so."

   "You'll have to be," he said. "Figure on staying most of the day.
   Zimburger wants to get back before dark."

   "I'm not coming back," I said. "I'm going over to St. Thomas for the
   carnival."

   He laughed. "I should have known you'd be attracted to something like that
   I'd stay out of town if I were you. The locals get a little wild. The best
   parties are on the boats -- the yachting set has a carnival of their own."

   "I'm not making any plans," I replied. "I'm just going over there and
   plunge into it -- a good relaxing drunk."

   After work I stopped by Sala's place and picked up my clothes, then drove
   out to my new apartment I had no gear to speak of, so all I had to do was
   hang a few things in the closet and put some beer in the refrigerator.
   Everything else was furnished -- sheets, towels, kitchen tools, everything
   but food.

   It was my place, and I liked it. I slept for a while, then I drove down to
   a little colmado and bought some eggs and bacon for breakfast.

   I had already cooked the bacon the next morning when I realized I'd
   forgotten to buy coffee. So I drove down to the Condado Beach Hotel and
   had breakfast there. I bought a Times and ate by myself at a small table
   on the lawn. It was a fairly expensive place and no one from the News was
   likely to be there. The hacks who weren't at Al's would be at The Holiday,
   a crowded outdoor restaurant on the beach near the edge of town.

   I spent all afternoon on the waterfront, trying to find out if the paper
   was going to be shut down by a strike. Just before I got off I told
   Schwartz I wouldn't be in the next day; I felt a sickness coming on.

   "Jesus Christ," he muttered. "You guys are getting like rats on a sinking
   ship. Sala tied up the darkroom all afternoon with his own work, and I
   caught Vanderwitz making a long-distance call to Washington." He shook his
   head. "We can't have a panic here; why don't you guys calm down?"

   "I'm calm," I replied. "I just need a day to straighten out my affairs."

   "Okay," he said wearily. "It's none of my business. Do whatever you want."

   I drove up to Al's and ate dinner by myself, then I went home and wrote
   the article that Sanderson wanted to send to the Times. It was a simple
   thing and I wrote it mostly from the material he'd given me -- prices
   going down for the summer, more young people on vacations, various
   outlying spots to visit. It took me about two hours and when I finished I
   decided to take it on over to him and have a few drinks before going to
   bed. I had to get up at six the next morning, but it was still early and I
   wasn't sleepy.

   There was nobody there when I arrived, so I went in and made a drink, then
   went out to the porch and sat down in one of the long chairs. I turned on
   the fan and put an album of show tunes on the phonograph.

   I decided that when I got a little more money I would look for a place
   like this for myself. The one I had now was good for a start, but it
   didn't have a porch or a garden or a beach, and I saw no reason why I
   shouldn't have those things.

   Sanderson came in after I'd been there about an hour. With him was a man
   who claimed to be the brother of a famous trumpet player. We made fresh
   drinks and Sanderson read my article and said it was excellent. "I hope
   you don't need the money right now," he said. "It might take a week or
   so." He shrugged. "It won't be much anyway -- say fifty dollars."

   "Fine with me," I said, settling back in the chair.

   "I'll see what else I can shove off on you," he said. "We're overloaded
   right now. Stop in when you get back from St Thomas."

   "Good deal," I said. "Things are looking pretty bleak at the paper -- I
   may have to depend on this stuff pretty soon."

   He nodded. "Bleak is right. You'll find out on Monday just how bad it is."

   "What's going to happen on Monday?" I asked.

   "I can't say," he replied. Then he smiled. "It wouldn't help if you knew,
   anyway. Just relax -- you won't starve."

   The man with the famous brother had been staring out at the beach, saying
   nothing. His name was Ted. Now he turned to Sanderson and asked in a bored
   voice: "How's the diving out there?"

   "Not much," Sanderson replied. "Pretty well fished out"

   We talked for a while about diving. Sanderson spoke with authority about
   "rapture of the deep" and diving on Palancar Reef. Ted had been living in
   southern France for two years, and had once worked for Jacques Cousteau.

   Sometime after midnight I realized I was getting drunk, so I got up to go.
   "Well," I said. "I have a date with Zimburger at the crack of dawn, I
   better get some sleep."

   I got up late the next morning. There was no time for breakfast, so I
   dressed hurriedly and grabbed an orange to eat on the way to the airport.
   Zimburger was waiting outside a small hangar at the far end of the runway.
   He nodded as I got out of the car and I walked over to where he was
   standing with two other men. "This is Kemp," he told them. "He's our
   writer -- works for the New York Times." He grinned and watched us shake
   hands.

   One of them was a restaurant man and the other was an architect. We'd be
   back by mid-afternoon, Zimburger told me, because Mr. Robbis, the
   restaurant man, had to go to a cocktail party.

   We flew over in a small Apache, with a pilot who looked like a refugee
   from the Flying Tigers. He said nothing the whole time and seemed totally
   unaware of our presence. After a dull, thirty-minute ride above the
   clouds, we nosed down toward Vieques and went hurtling into a small cow
   pasture that served as an airport. I gripped my seat, certain we were
   going to flip, but after several violent bounces we came to a stop.

   We climbed out and Zimburger introduced us to a huge man named Martin, who
   looked like a professional shark-hunter. He wore a crisp khaki outfit and
   motorcycle sunglasses, and his hair was bleached almost white from the
   sun. Zimburger referred to him as "my man here on the island."

   The general plan was to pick up some beer and sandwiches at Martin's bar,
   then drive to the other side of the island to see the property. Martin
   drove us into town in his Volkswagen bus, but the native who was supposed
   to make the sandwiches had disappeared. Martin had to make them himself;
   he left us on the empty dance floor and went back to the kitchen in a
   rage.

   It took about an hour. Zimburger was talking earnestly to the restaurant
   man, so I decided to go out and look for some coffee. The architect said
   he knew of a drugstore up the street.

   He'd been drinking steadily since five a.m., when Zimburger had
   unaccountably roused him out of bed. His name was Lazard and he sounded
   bitter.

   "This Zimburger's a real screwball," he told me. "He's had me running in
   circles for six months."

   "What the hell," I said. "As long as he pays."

   He looked over at me. "Is this the first time you've worked with him?"

   "Yeah," I said. "Why? Does he welsh?"

   Lazard looked unhappy. "I'm not sure. He's a fine one for free drinks and
   all that, but sometimes I wonder."

   I shrugged. "Well, Adelante's paying me. I don't have to deal with him --
   probably a good thing."

   He nodded and we went into the drugstore. The menu was a strip of
   Coca-Cola signs on the wall. There were red leatherette stools, a
   Formica-top counter, and thick tan mugs for the coffee. The woman who ran
   it was sloppy white, with a heavy southern accent.

   "Come right on in," she said. "What'll it be, fellas?"

   Great mother of God, I thought What town are we in?

   Lazard bought a copy of the News for twenty cents and immediately noticed
   my byline on the front page. "I thought you worked for the New York
   Times," he said, pointing to my name above the article on the waterfront
   strike.

   "Just gave 'em a hand," I said. "They're short-staffed right now -- asked
   me to help out until they can hire some more people."

   He nodded and smiled. "Man, that's the life, you know. What do you have --
   a roving assignment?"

   "More or less," I said.

   "That's a terrific deal," he replied. "Go anywhere you want. . . steady
   salary. . . no worries. . ."

   "Hell," I said, "you've got a pretty good thing yourself." I smiled. "Here
   we're both sitting on this godforsaken island, and being paid for it."

   "Not me," he replied. "Oh, I'm getting my expenses, but if this thing
   falls through it could set me back two years." He nodded gravely. "I'm not
   that well established. I can't afford to have my name associated with any
   botched jobs -- even if they're not my fault." He finished his coffee and
   set the mug on the counter. "That's where you're in the clear," he said.
   "All you have to do is write your story. With me, it's sink or swim on
   every job."

   I felt sorry for Lazard. He obviously didn't like the smell of what he'd
   got into, but he couldn't afford to be cautious. He was not much older
   than I was, and a thing like this would be a fine break for him if it came
   through. And if it didn't, it would be a bad break -- but even then he'd
   be in no worse shape than I'd been in for the past five years. I was
   tempted to tell him so, but I knew it wouldn't make him feel any better.
   Then he'd start feeling sorry for me too, and I didn't need that.

   "Yeah," I said. "A man wants many chestnuts in the fire."

   "Right," he replied, getting up to go. "That's why I envy you -- you've
   got all kinds of things going."

   I was beginning to believe him. The more he talked, the better I felt. On
   the way back to Martin's bar I looked at the town. It was almost deserted.
   The streets were wide and the buildings were low; most of them were built
   of concrete blocks and painted light pastel colors, but they all seemed
   empty.

   We turned the corner toward Martin's place and started down a hill toward
   the waterfront. There were scraggy palms on both sides of the street, and
   at the bottom of the hill a long pier poked into the harbor. At the end of
   it were four fishing boats, rolling lazily in the groundswell that came in
   from Vieques Sound.

   The bar was called The Ringfish. It had a tin roof and a bamboo fence
   around the entrance. The Volkswagen bus was parked outside the door.
   Inside, Zimburger and Robbis were still talking. Martin was packing the
   beer and the sandwiches in a big cooler.

   I asked him why the town looked so deserted.

   "No maneuvers this month," he replied. "You ought to see this place when
   five thousand U.S. Marines come in -- it's a madhouse."

   I shook my head, remembering that Sanderson had told me how two-thirds of
   the island was a Marine target range. A strange place to build a luxury
   resort, unless you wanted to fill it with retired Marines for cannon
   fodder.

   It was after ten when we finally started for the other side of the island.
   It was only four miles wide, a good drive through tall fields of sugar
   cane and along narrow roads lined with flamboyan trees. Finally we came
   over a rise and looked down on the Caribbean. The minute I saw it I felt
   that here was the place I'd been looking for. We drove across another cane
   field and then through a grove of palms. Martin parked the bus, and we
   walked out to look at the beach.

   My first feeling was a wild desire to drive a stake in the sand and claim
   the place for myself. The beach was white as salt, and cut off from the
   world by a ring of steep hills that faced the sea. We were on the edge of
   a large bay and the water was that clear, turquoise color that you get
   with a white sand bottom. I had never seen such a place. I wanted to take
   off all my clothes and never wear them again.

   Then I heard Zimburger's voice, an ugly chattering that brought me back to
   reality. I had not come here to admire this place, but to write a thing
   that would sell it. Zimburger called me over and pointed up at a hill
   where he planned to put the hotel. Then he pointed to other hills where
   the houses would be. This went on for almost an hour -- walking up and
   down the beach, staring at swamps that would blossom into shopping
   centers, lonely green hills that would soon be laced with sewer pipes, a
   clean white beach where cabana lots were already cleared and staked off. I
   took notes until I could stand no more of it, then I went back to the bus
   and found Martin drinking a beer.

   "Progress marches on," I muttered, plunging my hand into the cooler.

   He smiled. "Yeah, this is gonna be some place."

   I opened the beer and swilled it down, then reached for another. We talked
   for a while, and Martin told me he'd first come to Vieques as a Marine. He
   knew a good thing when he saw one, he said, so instead of staying for
   twenty, as he'd planned, he got out after ten and came back to Vieques to
   set up a bar. Now, in addition to The Kingfish, he owned a laundry, five
   houses in Isabel Segunda, the only newspaper concession, and he was
   setting up a car rental agency to handle Zimburger's influx. On top of
   everything else, he was "general overseer" for Zimburger's property, which
   put him in on the ground floor. He smiled and sipped his beer. "You might
   say this place has been good to me. If I'd stayed in the States I'd be
   just another ex-jarhead."

   "Where you from?" I asked.

   "Norfolk," he said. "But I'm not too homesick. San Juan's as far as I've
   been from this place in six years." He paused, looking around at the
   little green island that had been so good to him. "Yeah, I grew up in
   Norfolk, but I don't remember it much -- seems too long ago."

   We had another beer, then Zimburger and Robbis and Lazard came back from
   the beach. Lazard was sweating and Robbis looked very impatient

   Zimburger gave me a friendly slap on the shoulder. "Well," he said with a
   grin, "you ready to write that article? Didn't I tell you this site was a
   beaut?"

   "Sure," I said. "I'm all set."

   He shook his head with mock disappointment "Ah, you writers -- never a
   good word for anything." He laughed nervously. "Goddamn writers -- no
   telling what they'll do."

   All the way back to town Zimburger talked incessantly about his plans for
   Vieques. Finally Martin broke in to say that we were all going to eat
   lunch at his club -- he'd sent the boys out for some fresh lobster.

   "You mean langosta," said Zimburger.

   Martin shrugged. "Hell, every time I say that I have to go through a long
   explanation -- so I just call it lobster."

   "It's the Caribbean lobster," Zimburger said to Robbis. "Bigger and better
   than the other kind, and it doesn't have claws." He grinned. "Old God sure
   was in a good mood when he made this place."

   Robbis stared out the window, then turned and spoke to Martin. "I'll have
   to take a raincheck on that," he said stiffly. "I have an appointment in
   San Juan, it's getting late."

   "Hell's bells," said Zimburger. "We got time to kill. It's only about
   one."

   "I'm not in the habit of killing time," said Robbis, turning again to
   stare out the window.

   I could tell by his tone that something had gone wrong out there on the
   beach. From the morning conversation, I'd gathered that Robbis represented
   some chain of restaurants whose name I was supposed to recognize.
   Apparently Zimburger was counting on adding a Vieques branch to that
   chain.

   Out of the corner of my eye I looked at Lazard. He seemed in a worse mood
   than Robbis. It gave me a definite pleasure, which bordered on euphoria
   when Zimburger announced, in a surly tone, that we would fly back to San
   Juan immediately.

   "I think I'll stay overnight," I said. "I have to be in St Thomas tomorrow
   to cover that carnival." I looked at Martin: "What time does the ferry
   leave?"

   We were coming into town now, and Martin shifted quickly into second to
   climb a steep hill. "The ferry was yesterday," he said. "But we got a boat
   going over. Hell, I may take you myself."

   "Good enough," I said. "No sense in me going back to San Juan. You can
   drop me at the hotel."

   "Later," he replied with a grin. "We'll eat first -- can't let all that. .
   . ah. . . langosta go to waste."

   We drove Zimburger and Robbis and Lazard out to the airport, where the
   pilot was sleeping peacefully in the shadow of the plane. Zimburger yelled
   at him and he slowly got up, never changing his weary expression.
   Obviously, this man gave a damn for nothing at all; I felt like nudging
   Lazard and telling him that we had both missed the boat.

   But Lazard was brooding and all I said to him was, "See you around." He
   nodded and climbed into the plane. Robbis followed, and then Zimburger,
   who sat next to the stony-faced pilot. They were all staring straight
   ahead when the plane bucked off down the runway and skimmed over the trees
   toward Puerto Rico.

   I spent the next few hours at Martin's bar. A friend of his ate lunch with
   us; he was another ex-Marine, who owned a bar on a hill outside of town.
   "Drink up," Martin kept telling me. "It's all on the house." He grinned
   maliciously. "Or maybe I should say it's all on Mister Zimburger -- you're
   his guest, right?"

   "Right," I replied, and accepted another glass of rum.

   Finally we had the lobster. I could tell it had been thawing all day, but
   Martin proudly said his boys had just brought it in. I had a vision of
   Martin ordering his lobsters from Maine, then tearing the claws off and
   sticking them in the freezer until he could palm them off on Zimburger's
   guests -- and then etching it very carefully on the expense sheet. One
   journalist -- forty dollars a day, labor and entertainment

   After I'd eaten two langostas, swilled countless drinks, and grown
   extremely weary of their babbling, I got up to go. "Which way is the
   hotel?" I asked, stooping to pick up my leather bag.

   "Come on," said Martin, heading for the door. "I'll take you up to the
   Carmen."

   I followed him out to the bus. We drove up the hill about three blocks to
   a low pink building, with a sign that said Hotel Carmen. The place was
   empty, and Martin told the woman to give me the best room in the house; it
   was on him.

   Before leaving, he said he'd take me over to St Thomas tomorrow in the
   launch. "We'll have to take off about ten," he said. "I have to be there
   at noon to meet a friend."

   I knew he was lying, but it didn't matter. Martin was like an auto
   mechanic who'd just discovered the insurance company, or a punk gone mad
   on his first expense account. I looked forward to the day when he and
   Zimburger would find each other out.

   The best room in the Carmen cost three dollars, and had a balcony
   overlooking the town and the harbor. I was very full and half drunk, and
   when I got in the room I went to sleep immediately.

   Two hours later I was awakened by someone tapping on the door. "Senor,"
   the voice said. "You have dinner with Senor Kingfish, no?"

   "I'm not hungry," I said. "I just ate lunch."

   "Si," the voice replied, and I heard quick footsteps on the stairs going
   down to the street. It was still light and I couldn't get back to sleep,
   so I went out to get a bottle of rum and some ice. In the same building
   with the hotel was what appeared to be a storage bin full of liquor. A
   grinning Puerto Rican sold me a bottle of rum for a dollar, and a bag of
   ice for two dollars. I paid and went back upstairs to my room.

   I mixed a drink and went out on the balcony to sit down. The town still
   looked deserted. Far out on the horizon I could see the neighboring island
   of Culebra, and from somewhere in that direction came the shuddering thump
   of explosions. I recalled Sanderson telling me that Culebra was an aerial
   bombing range for the U.S. Navy. Once it had been a magic place, but no
   longer.

   I had been there about twenty minutes when a Negro came down the street on
   a small grey horse. The hoofbeats rang through the town like pistol shots.
   I watched him clatter up the street and disappear over a small rise. The
   hoofbeats carried back to me long after he was out of sight.

   Then I heard another sound, the muted rhythm of a steel band. It was
   getting dark now, and I couldn't tell what direction the music was coming
   from. It was a soft, compelling sound, and I sat there and drank and
   listened to it, feeling at peace with myself and the world, as the hills
   behind me turned a red-gold color in the last slanting rays of the sun.

   Then it was night A few lights came on in the town. The music came in long
   bursts, as if someone was explaining something between choruses, and then
   it would start again. I heard voices below me on the street, and now and
   then the hoofbeats of another horse.

   Isabel Segunda seemed more active at night than it had been during the
   long, hot day.

   It was the kind of town that made you feel like Humphrey Bogart: you came
   in on a bumpy little plane, and, for some mysterious reason, got a private
   room with a balcony overlooking the town and the harbor; then you sat
   there and drank until something happened. I felt a tremendous distance
   between me and everything real. Here I was on Vieques island, a place so
   insignificant that I had never heard of it until I'd been told to come
   here -- delivered by one nut, and waiting to be taken off by another.

   It was almost May. I knew that New York was getting warm now, that London
   was wet, that Rome was hot -- and I was on Vieques, where it was always
   hot and where New York and London and Rome were just names on a map.

   Then I remembered the Marines -- no maneuvers this month -- and I
   remembered why I was here. Zimburger wants a brochure. . . aimed at
   investors. . . your job is to sell the place. . . don't be late or he'll.
   . .

   I was being paid twenty-five dollars a day to ruin the only place I'd seen
   in ten years where I'd felt a sense of peace. Paid to piss in my own bed,
   as it were, and I was only here because I'd got drunk and been arrested
   and had thereby become a pawn in some high-level face-saving bullshit.

   I sat there a long time, and thought about a lot of things. Foremost among
   them was the suspicion that my strange and ungovernable instincts might do
   me in before I had a chance to get rich. No matter how much I wanted all
   those things that I needed money to buy, there was some devilish current
   pushing me off in another direction -- toward anarchy and poverty and
   craziness. That maddening delusion that a man can lead a decent life
   without hiring himself out as a Judas Goat.

   Finally I got drunk and went to bed. Martin woke me up the next day and we
   had breakfast in the drugstore before taking off for St Thomas. The day
   was bright and blue, and we had a good crossing. By the time we came into
   the harbor of Charlotte Amalie I'd forgotten Vieques and Zimburger and
   everything else.

   Thirteen

   We were still in open water when I heard the noise. The island loomed up
   like a big mound of grass in the ocean, and from it came the melodious
   pounding of steel drums, a steady roar of engines, and much shouting. It
   grew louder as we entered the harbor, and there was still a half mile of
   blue water between us and the town when I heard the first explosion. Then
   several more in rapid succession. I could hear people screaming, the wail
   of a trumpet, and the steady rhythm of drums.

   There were thirty or forty yachts in the harbor; Martin eased his launch
   among them, heading for an empty spot at the pier. I grabbed my bag and
   hopped out, telling Martin I was in a hurry to meet some people. He nodded
   and said he was in a hurry too; he had to go over to St John to see a man
   about a boat.

   I was glad to be rid of him. He was one of those people who could go to
   New York and be "fascinating," but here in his own world he was just a
   cheap functionary, and a dull one at that.

   As I walked toward the center of town the noise became deafening. The
   street reverberated with the sound of roaring engines, and I pressed
   forward to see what it meant. When I got to the corner the crowd was so
   thick I could barely move. Down the middle of the street ran a bar, more
   than three blocks long, a series of wooden booths full of rum and whiskey.
   In each one of them, several bartenders worked feverishly to supply the
   mob with drink. I stopped in front of one that said "Rum 25 cents". They
   served the drinks in paper flagons, a chunk of ice and a violent slug of
   rum to each one.

   Further down the street I came to the center of the crowd. I kept inching
   forward until I found myself in an open space, ringed by thousands of
   people. It was a Go-Kart race, little engines mounted on wooden chassis,
   driven by wild-eyed drunkards, screeching and sliding around a course laid
   out in what appeared to be the town plaza.

   At close range the noise was unbearable. People were shoving me from side
   to side and my drink kept spilling down my shirt, but there was nothing I
   could do. Most of the faces around me were black, but all through the
   crowd I could see American tourists, white and sweating and most of them
   wearing carnival hats.

   Across the square was a large building with a balcony that looked down on
   the race. I decided to go there. It was only a hundred yards away, but it
   took me thirty minutes to fight and slither through the mob, and by the
   time I sat down on the balcony I was weak and soaked with sweat.

   My drink had been knocked out of my hands somewhere below, so I went to
   the bar for another. For fifty cents I got a dash of rum and a lot of
   water -- but it came in a glass, with normal ice cubes, and I felt a
   confidence that I could drink it at my leisure. I was in the Grand Hotel,
   an ancient grey structure with white pillars and ceiling fans and a
   balcony that ran the length of the block.

   I wondered how I was going to locate Yeamon. We'd arranged to meet at the
   post office at noon, but I was already more than an hour late, and the
   post office was closed. I could see it from the balcony, so I decided to
   stay there until I caught sight of him, then try to get his attention. In
   the meantime, I would drink, rest, and ponder the meaning of this mob.

   The Go-Kart races were over now, and the crowd turned to the band for
   amusement. Another band appeared, and then others at different corners of
   the square, each leading a train of dancers. Four steel bands, playing the
   same wild tune, came together in the middle of the square. The sound was
   incredible; people were singing and stomping and screaming. Here and there
   I saw tourists trying to get out of it, but most of them were carried
   along in the mob. The bands moved off together, heading down the main
   street. Behind them the crowd linked arms, thirty abreast, blocking the
   street and both sidewalks -- chanting the music as they jerked and
   staggered along.

   I had been there a while when a man came up and stood by the railing in
   front of me. I nodded hello, and he smiled. "My name's Ford," he said,
   extending his hand. "I live here. You down for the carnival?"

   "I guess so," I replied.

   He looked over the railing again and shook his head. "A violent thing," he
   said solemnly. "Be careful, you never know what might happen."

   I nodded. "By the way, maybe you can tell me some other hotels in town.
   The bartender says this one's full."

   He laughed. "Nope, not an empty room on the island."

   "Damn," I said.

   "Why worry?" he replied. "Sleep on the beach. Lots of people do -- better
   than most hotels."

   "Where?" I said. "Are there any close to town?"

   "Sure," he replied, "but they'll all be full. Your best bet is Lindbergh
   Beach, out by the airport. It's the nicest."

   I shrugged. "Well, it may come to that."

   He laughed. "Good luck." Then he reached into his shirt pocket. "Come out
   and have dinner if you have time. It's not expensive -- it only sounds
   that way." He laughed and waved goodbye. I looked at his card; it was an
   advertisement for a hotel called Pirate's Castle -- Owen Ford, prop.

   "Thanks," I muttered, tossing the card over the railing. I was tempted to
   go out there and eat a huge meal, then hand him a card saying, "Worldwide
   Congress of Non-Paying Journalists -- Paul Kemp, prop."

   I felt a tap on my shoulder. It was Yeamon, looking wild-eyed and carrying
   two bottles of rum. "I thought you'd be up here," he said with a grin.
   "We've been checking the post office all day -- then I realized that any
   professional journalist would seek the highest and safest spot in town."
   He fell down in a wicker chair. "What else but the balcony of the Grand
   Hotel?"

   I nodded. "It's nice, but don't get comfortable. This place is sold out
   like all the others." Then I looked around. "Where's Chenault?"

   "I left her downstairs in the gift shop," he said. "She'll be up -- can we
   get ice here?"

   "I guess so," I said. "I've been getting drinks."

   "For God's sake," he replied. "Don't buy rum here. I found a place where
   you can get it for seventy-five cents a gallon -- all we really need is
   ice."

   "Fine," I said. "Go ask."

   As he started for the bar, Chenault appeared. "Over here," he called, and
   she came over to the rail. Yeamon went to the bar and Chenault sat down.

   She fell back in the chair and groaned. "My lord!" she said. "We've been
   dancing all day. I'm nearly dead."

   She looked happy. She also looked as pretty as I'd ever seen her. She was
   wearing sandals and a madras skirt and a white sleeveless blouse, but the
   difference was in her face. It was red and healthy and damp with sweat.
   Her hair hung loose and free on her shoulders and her eyes glittered with
   excitement. There was something especially sexual about her now. Her small
   body, still wrapped very tastefully in plaids and white silk, seemed ready
   to explode with energy.

   Yeamon came back with three glasses of ice, cursing because the bartender
   had charged him thirty cents for each one. He put them on the floor and
   filled them with rum. "These bastards," he mumbled. "They'll get rich
   selling ice -- look how the rotten stuff melts."

   Chenault laughed and kicked him playfully in the back. "Stop that silly
   complaining," she said. "You'll spoil the fun."

   "Balls," he replied.

   Chenault smiled and sipped her drink. "If you'd let yourself go, you'd
   enjoy it"

   He finished pouring the drinks and stood up. "Don't give me that crap," he
   said. "I don't need a mob to enjoy myself."

   She didn't seem to hear him. "It's too bad," she said. "Fritz just can't
   enjoy himself because he can't let go." She looked at me. "Don't you
   agree?"

   "Leave me out of it," I said. "I came here to drink."

   She giggled and held up her glass. "That's right," she said. "We came here
   to drink -- just have a good time and let go!"

   Yeamon frowned and turned his back on us, leaning on the railing and
   staring down at the plaza. It was almost empty now, but far down the
   street we could hear the drums and the howl of the crowd.

   Chenault finished her drink and stood up. "Come on," she said. "I feel
   like dancing."

   Yeamon shook his head wearily. "I don't know if I can stand any more of
   it."

   She pulled at his arm. "Come on, it'll do you good. You too, Paul." She
   reached out with her other hand and tugged at my shirt.

   "Why not?" I said. "We might as well try it."

   Yeamon straightened up and reached for the glasses. "Wait a minute," he
   said. "I can't face it again without rum -- I'll get some more ice."

   We waited for him at the top of the stairs that led down to the street
   Chenault turned to me with a big smile. "We have to sleep on the beach,"
   she said. "Did Fritz tell you?"

   "No," I said. "But I found out anyway. I know one that comes highly
   recommended."

   She grabbed my arm and squeezed it. "Good. I want to sleep on the beach."

   I nodded, seeing Yeamon approach with the drinks. I enjoyed Chenault in
   this wild condition, but it made me nervous. I recalled the last time I'd
   seen her full of drink, and the idea that anything like that might happen
   again, especially in a place like this, was not a happy prospect.

   We went down the stairs and walked along the streets, sipping our drinks.
   Then we caught up with the mob. Chenault grabbed hold of somebody's waist
   in the last row of dancers and Yeamon got in beside her. I stuffed the
   bottle I'd been carrying into my pants pocket and fell in next to Yeamon.
   In a moment we were sealed in by more people behind us. I felt hands on my
   waist and heard a shrill voice screaming, "Take it off! Take it off."

   I looked over my shoulder and saw a white man who looked like a used car
   salesman. Then the mob surged left and I saw the man stumble and fall. The
   dancers trampled him without missing a beat.

   The bands kept circling the town and the mob kept growing larger. I was
   dripping with sweat and ready to collapse from the constant dancing, but
   there was no way out of it. I looked to my left and saw Yeamon, smiling
   grimly as he executed the jerky shuffle-step that carried us along.
   Chenault was laughing happily and swinging her hips to the constant thump
   of the drums.

   Finally my legs threatened to give out. I tried to catch Yeamon's
   attention, but the noise was deafening. In desperation, I lunged across
   the chain of dancers, knocking people off balance, and grabbed Yeamon's
   arm. "Out!" I yelled. "I can't stand it."

   He nodded and pointed toward a side street a few hundred yards ahead. Then
   he grabbed Chenault by the arm and began edging toward the sidelines. I
   whooped distractedly as we bulled through the crowd.

   When we got clear of the mob we stood there and let it pass, then we
   started off toward a restaurant that Yeamon had seen earlier in the day.
   "It looks decent, anyway," he said. "I hope to God it's cheap."

   The place was called Olivers. It was a makeshift, thatched-roof affair on
   top of a concrete building with boarded-up windows. We struggled up the
   stairs and found an empty table. The place was crowded, and I pushed to
   the bar. Singapore slings were fifty cents each, but it was worth that
   much just to sit down.

   From our table we could look up and down the waterfront. It was jammed
   with all kinds of boats -- sleek power cruisers and scraggy, native sloops
   full of bananas, tied up alongside sleek eight-meter racing hulls from
   Newport and Bermuda. Beyond the channel buoys stood a few big motor yachts
   that people said were gambling ships. The sun went down slowly behind a
   hill across the harbor and lights began to flicker in buildings on the
   wharf. Somewhere across town we could still hear the frenzied beat of the
   dance as it moved through the streets.

   A waiter appeared, wearing an Old Spice yachting cap. We all ordered the
   seafood platter. "And three glasses of ice," Yeamon told him. "Right away,
   if you don't mind."

   The waiter nodded and disappeared. After a ten-minute wait Yeamon went to
   the bar and got three glasses of ice. We poured our drinks under the table
   and set the bottle on the floor.

   "What we need is a gallon jug," said Yeamon. "And some kind of a knapsack
   to carry ice."

   "Why the gallon jug?" I asked.

   "For that seventy-five-cent rum," he replied.

   "Hell with it," I said. "It's probably worthless." I nodded toward the
   bottle on the floor. "This is cheap enough -- you can't beat good rum at a
   dollar a bottle."

   He shook his head. "Nothing worse than traveling with a rich journalist --
   throw dollars around like beans."

   I laughed. "I'm not the only one working for Sanderson these days," I
   said. "The big money is just around the corner -- never lose faith."

   "Not for me," he replied. "I'm supposed to be doing an article on this
   carnival -- checking with the tourist bureau and all that." He shrugged.
   "No dice. I can't sneak around digging up facts while everybody else is
   drunk."

   "Nobody's drunk," said Chenault "We're just letting go."

   He smiled lazily. "That's right, we're kicking off the traces, really
   raising hell -- why don't you write a good stiff note to the Smith College
   alumni letter and tell 'em where they missed the boat?"

   She laughed. "Fritz is jealous of my background. I have so much more to
   rebel against."

   "Balls," said Yeamon. "You don't have anything to rebel with."

   The waiter arrived with the food and we stopped talking. It was dark when
   we finished, and Chenault was anxious to get into the streets again. I was
   in no hurry. This place was peaceful, now that the crowd had thinned out,
   but it was close enough to the chaos that we could join it anytime we
   wanted.

   Finally she dragged us down to the street, but the dance had petered out.
   We wandered around the town, stopping at the liquor store to buy two more
   bottles of rum, then returning to the Grand Hotel to see what was
   happening there.

   A party was going on at one end of the balcony. Most of these people
   appeared to be expatriates -- not tourists, but the type who looked like
   they might live here on the island, or at least somewhere in the
   Caribbean. They were all very tan. A few had beards, but most of them were
   freshly shaven. The ones with beards wore shorts and old polo shirts, the
   boating set. The others wore linen suits and leather shoes that sparkled
   in the dim light of the balcony chandeliers.

   We barged in and sat down at a table. I was fairly drunk by now and I
   didn't care if we were thrown out or not. The party broke up just a few
   minutes after we arrived. Nobody said anything to us and I felt a little
   foolish when we were left on the balcony by ourselves. We sat there for a
   while, then wandered down to the street. A few blocks away we could hear a
   band warming up. Soon the street was jammed once again with people, all
   clinging to each other and dancing the strange dinga that we'd learned
   earlier in the day.

   We humored Chenault for a few hours, hoping she'd get tired of the
   dancing, but finally Yeamon had to drag her out of the mob. She pouted
   until we found ourselves in a club full of drunken Americans. A calypso
   band was hammering and the floor was full of dancers. By this time I was
   drunk. I fell into a chair and watched as Yeamon and Chenault tried to
   dance. The bouncer came over to me and said I owed fifteen dollars for the
   cover charge, and I gave it to him, rather than argue.

   Yeamon came back to the table alone. He had left Chenault to dance with an
   American who looked like a nazi. "You rotten butcher!" I yelled, shaking
   my fist at him. But he didn't see me, and the music was so loud that he
   couldn't hear. Finally Chenault left him and came back to the table.

   Yeamon led me through the crowd. People were screaming and grabbing at me
   and I didn't know where I was being taken. My only thought was to lie down
   and sleep. When we got outside I slumped in a doorway while Yeamon and
   Chenault argued about what to do next.

   Yeamon wanted to go to the beach, but Chenault was for more dancing.
   "Don't order me around, you goddamn puritan!" she screamed. "I'm having a
   good time and all you do is sulk!"

   He knocked her down with a quick whack to the head, and I heard her
   groaning somewhere near my feet as he shouted for a cab. I helped him lift
   her into the back seat and we explained to the driver that we wanted to go
   to Lindbergh Beach. He grinned widely and started off. I was tempted to
   reach over the seat and give him a rabbit punch. He thinks we're going to
   rape her, I thought. He thinks we grabbed her off the street and now we're
   taking her out to the beach to hump her like dogs. And the bastard was
   grinning about it; a criminal degenerate with no morals.

   Lindbergh Beach was across the road from the airport. It was surrounded by
   a tall cyclone fence, but the driver took us to a place where we could
   climb over it by using a tree. Chenault refused to make any effort, so we
   shoved her over and let her fall in the sand. Then we found a good spot
   that was partly surrounded by trees. There was no moon, but I could hear
   the surf a few yards in front of us. I spread my filthy cord coat on the
   sand for a pillow, then fell down and went to sleep.

   The sun woke me up the next morning. I sat up and groaned. My clothes were
   full of sand. Ten feet to my left Yeamon and Chenault were sleeping on
   their clothes. They were both naked and her arm was thrown over his back.
   I stared at her, thinking that no one could blame me if I lost my wits and
   pounced on her, after first crippling Yeamon with a blow on the back of
   his skull.

   I considered trying to cover them with her raincoat, but I was afraid
   they'd wake up as I hovered over them. I didn't want that, so I decided to
   go swimming and wake them up by shouting from the water.

   I took off my clothes and tried to shake the sand out, then shuffled naked
   into the bay. The water was cool, and I rolled around like a porpoise,
   trying to get clean. Then I swam to a wooden raft about a hundred yards
   out. Yeamon and Chenault were still asleep. At the other end of the beach
   was a long white building that looked like a dance hall. An outrigger
   canoe was pulled up on the sand in front of it, and under the nearby trees
   I could see chairs and tables with thatched umbrellas. It was somewhere
   around nine o'clock, but there was no one in sight I lay there for a long
   time, trying not to think.

   Fourteen

   Chenault came awake with a shriek, snatching the raincoat around her as
   she peered up and down the beach.

   "Out here," I yelled. "Come on in."

   She looked out at me and smiled, holding the raincoat between us like a
   veil. Then Yeamon woke up, looking puzzled and angry at whatever had
   broken his sleep.

   "Let's go!" I yelled. "Up for the morning dip."

   He stood up and ambled toward the water. Chenault called after him, waving
   his shorts. "Here!" she said sternly. "Put these on!"

   I waited for them on the raft. Yeamon came first, thrashing across the bay
   like a crocodile. Then I saw Chenault swimming toward us, wearing her
   panties and bra. I began to feel uncomfortable. I waited until she got to
   the raft, then I slid off. "I'm hungry as hell," I said, treading water.
   "I'm going over to the airport for breakfast."

   When I got to the beach I looked around for my bag. I remembered putting
   it in a tree the night before, but I couldn't remember which one. Finally
   I found it, jammed into the crotch of two branches just above where I'd
   been sleeping. I put on some clean pants and a rumpled silk shirt.

   Just before I left I glanced out at the raft and saw Yeamon jump naked
   into the water. Chenault laughed and tore off her bra and panties, then
   leaped in on top of him. I watched for a moment, then tossed my bag over
   the fence and climbed over after it.

   I walked along a road that paralleled the runway, and after a half mile or
   so I came to the main hangar, a huge Quonset hut that bustled with
   activity. Planes landed every few minutes. Most of them were small Cessnas
   and Pipers, but every ten minutes or so a DC-3 would come in, bringing a
   fresh pack of revelers from San Juan.

   I shaved in the men's room, then pushed through the crowd to the
   restaurant. The people just off the planes were getting their free drinks,
   and in one corner of the hangar was a group of drunken Puerto Ricans,
   beating on their luggage to the tune of some chant I couldn't understand.
   It sounded like a football cheer: "Busha boomba, balla wa! Busha boomba,
   balla wa!" I suspected they would never make it into town.

   I bought a Miami Herald and had a big breakfast of pancakes and bacon.
   Yeamon arrived an hour or so later. "Christ, I'm hungry," he said. "I need
   a massive breakfast"

   "Is Chenault still with us?" I asked.

   He nodded. "She's downstairs shaving her legs."

   It was almost noon when we got a bus to town. It let us off at a public
   market and we started walking in the general direction of the Grand Hotel,
   stopping now and then to look in the few store windows that were not
   boarded up.

   As we neared the middle of town the noise increased. But this was a
   different sound -- not the roar of happy voices or the musical thump of
   drums, but the wild screams of a small group of people. It sounded like a
   gang war, punctuated by guttural cries and breaking glass.

   We hurried toward it, cutting down a side street that led to the shopping
   district. When we turned the corner I saw a frenzied mob, jamming the
   street and blocking both sidewalks. We slowed down and approached
   cautiously.

   About two hundred people had looted one of the big liquor stores. Most of
   them were Puerto Ricans. Cases of champagne and scotch lay broken in the
   street, and everyone I saw had a bottle.

   They were screaming and dancing, and in the middle of the crowd a giant
   Swede wearing a blue jockstrap was blowing long blasts on a trumpet.

   As we watched, a fat American woman raised two magnums of champagne above
   her head and smashed them together, laughing wildly as the glass and the
   booze rained down on her bare shoulders. A percussion corps of drunkards
   was beating with beer cans on empty scotch crates. It was the same chant
   I'd heard at the airport: "Busha boomba, balla wa! Busha boomba, balla
   wa!" All over the street people danced feverishly by themselves, jerking
   and yelling to the rhythm of the chant.

   The liquor store was nothing but a shell, a bare room with broken windows
   in the front. People kept running in and out of it, grabbing stray bottles
   and drinking them as fast as they could before somebody else jerked them
   away. Empty bottles were tossed casually into the street, making it a sea
   of broken glass, studded with thousands of beer cans.

   We stayed on the edge of it. I wanted to get my hands on some of that
   stolen booze, but I was afraid of the police. Yeamon wandered into the
   store and came out moments later with a magnum of champagne. He smiled
   sheepishly and tucked it into his bag, saying nothing. Finally my lust for
   drink overcame my fear of jail and I made a run for a case of scotch that
   was lying in the gutter near the front of the store. It was empty and I
   looked around for another. In the forest of dancing feet I saw several
   unbroken bottles of whiskey. I rushed toward them, shoving people out of
   the way. The noise was deafening and I expected at any moment to be
   smashed on the head with a bottle. I managed to rescue three quarts of Old
   Crow, all that was left of a case. The other bottles were broken and hot
   whiskey oozed through the streets. I got a firm grip on my loot and leaned
   into the mob, aiming for the spot where I'd left Yeamon and Chenault.

   We hurried off down a side street, passing a blue jeep marked "Poleece."
   In it, a gendarme in a pith helmet sat half asleep, idly scratching his
   crotch.

   We stopped at the place where we'd eaten the night before. I put the
   whiskey in my satchel and ordered three drinks while we pondered the next
   move. The program said a pageant of some kind was scheduled at the
   ballpark in a few hours. It sounded harmless enough, but then nothing at
   all had been officially scheduled for that hour when the mob looted the
   liquor store. That was supposed to be a "Rest Period." There was another
   "Rest Period" between the ballpark festivities and the "All Out Tramp,"
   officially scheduled for eight o'clock sharp.

   It had an ominous sound. All the other Tramps were listed as beginning and
   ending at certain times. The "Birds and Bees Tramp," on Thursday, began at
   eight and ended at ten. The "High Combustible Tramp," which seemed to be
   the one we'd been caught in the night before, ran from eight until
   midnight. But the program said only that the "All Out Tramp" would begin
   at eight, and in small brackets on the same line was a note saying "climax
   of carnival."

   "This thing tonight could get out of control," I said, tossing the program
   on the table. "At least I hope so."

   Chenault laughed and winked at me. "We'll have to get Fritz drunk, so he
   can enjoy it."

   "Balls," Yeamon muttered, not looking up from the program. "You get drunk
   again tonight and I'll abandon your ass."

   She laughed again. "Don't try to say I was drunk -- I remember who hit
   me."

   He shrugged. "It's good for you -- clears your head."

   "No sense arguing about it," I said. "We're bound to get drunk -- look at
   all this whiskey." I patted my satchel.

   "And this," said Chenault, pointing to the magnum of champagne under
   Yeamon's chair.

   "Christ help us," Yeamon muttered.

   We finished our drinks and wandered over to the Grand Hotel. From the
   balcony we could see people heading for the ballpark.

   Yeamon wanted to go out to Yacht Haven and find a boat leaving soon for
   South America. I wasn't particularly anxious to join the mob at the
   ballpark and I remembered Sanderson saying most of the good parties were
   on the boats, so we decided to go there.

   It was a long walk in the sun, and by the time we got there I was sorry I
   hadn't offered to pay for a cab. I was sweating horribly and my bag seemed
   to weigh forty pounds. The entrance was a palm-lined driveway that led to
   a swimming pool, and beyond the pool was a hill that led down to the
   piers. There were more than a hundred boats, everything from tiny harbor
   sloops to huge schooners, and their naked spars swayed lazily against a
   background of green hills and a blue Caribbean sky. I stopped on the pier
   and looked down at a forty-foot racing sloop. My first thought was that I
   had to have one. It had a dark blue hull and a gleaming teakwood deck, and
   I would not have been surprised to see on the bow a sign, saying: "For
   Sale -- One Soul, no less."

   I nodded thoughtfully. Hell, anybody could have a car and an apartment,
   but a boat like this was the nuts. I wanted it, and considering the value
   I placed on my soul in those days, I might have struck a bargain if that
   sign had been there on the bow.

   We spent all afternoon at Yacht Haven, desperately scouring the docks for
   an outgoing boat where Yeamon and Chenault could sign on with no questions
   asked. One man offered to take them as far as Antigua in a week or so,
   another was going to Bermuda, and finally we located a big yawl that was
   headed for Los Angeles, via the Panama Canal.

   "Great," said Yeamon. "How much would you charge us to ride that far?"

   "Nothing," said the owner of the yawl, a poker-faced little man wearing
   white trunks and a baggy shirt. "I won't take you." Yeamon looked stunned.

   "I pay my crew," said the man. "And besides that I have my wife and three
   kids -- no room for you." He shrugged and turned away.

   Most of the boat people were gracious, but a few were openly rude. One
   captain -- or maybe a mate -- laughed at Yeamon and said: "Sorry, pal. I
   don't carry scum on my boat."

   Far out at the end of the pier we noticed a gleaming white hull flying the
   French flag and rocking leisurely in deep water.

   "That's the finest craft in the harbor," said a man standing next to us.
   "A world cruiser, seventy-five feet long, eighteen knots, radar dome,
   electric winches and a walkaround bed."

   We continued along the pier and came to a boat called the Blue Peter,
   where a man who later introduced himself as Willis told us to come aboard
   for a drink. Several other people were there and we stayed for hours.
   Yeamon went off after a while to check the other boats, but Chenault and I
   stayed and drank. Several times I noticed Willis staring at Chenault, and
   when I mentioned that we were sleeping on the beach he said we could leave
   our bags on the boat, instead of lugging them around. "Sorry I can't offer
   you bunks," he added. "But I only got two." He grinned. "One of 'em's
   double, of course, but that still makes it crowded."

   "Yeah," I said.

   We left our bags there, and by the time we started for town we were all
   drunk. Willis rode with us in a cab as far as the Grand Hotel, and said
   he'd probably see us later in one of the bars.

   Fifteen

   Sometime after midnight we found ourselves in front of a place called the
   Blue Grotto, a crowded waterfront dance hall with a two dollar cover
   charge. I tried to pay, but people laughed and a squatty woman grabbed my
   arm. "Oh, no," she said. "You come with us. We go to the real party."

   I recognized our friends from the street dance. A bully was slapping
   Yeamon on the back and babbling about a "whip fight" and some spies with a
   case of gin. "I know these people," said Chenault, "let's go with them."

   We ran down the street to where they had a car, and about six more people
   piled in with us. At the end of the main street we turned up toward the
   hills above town, climbing and twisting on a dark little road through what
   appeared to be the residential section. The houses at the bottom of the
   hill were wooden, with peeling paint, but as we went higher, more and more
   houses were made of concrete blocks. Finally they became almost elaborate,
   with screen porches and lawns.

   We stopped at a house full of lights and music. The street in front of it
   was jammed with cars and there was no place to park. The driver let us out
   and said he'd join us when he found a place for the car. The squatty girl
   gave a loud whoop and ran up the steps to the front door. I followed
   reluctantly and saw her talking to a fat woman in a bright green dress.
   Then she pointed back at me. Yeamon and Chenault and the others caught up
   as I stopped at the door.

   "Six dollars, please," said the woman, holding out her hand.

   "Christ!" I said. "How many does that pay for?"

   "Two," she said. "You and the young lady." She nodded at the girl who had
   ridden out from town on my lap.

   I cursed silently and gave up six dollars. My date repaid me with a coy
   smile, and took my hand as we entered the house. My God, I thought, this
   pig is after me.

   Yeamon was right behind us, muttering about the six dollar fee. "This
   better be good," he told Chenault. "You might as well figure on getting a
   job when we get back to San Juan."

   She laughed, a happy little shriek that had nothing to do with Yeamon's
   remark. I glanced at her, and saw the excitement in her eyes. That dip in
   the harbor had sobered me up a bit, and Yeamon seemed pretty steady, but
   Chenault had the look of a hophead, ready to turn on.

   We went down a dark hall and into a room full of music and noise. It was
   jammed from wall to wall, and over in one corner a band was playing. Not
   the steel band I expected to see, but three horns and a drum. The sound
   was familiar, but I couldn't place it. Then, looking up at the ceiling
   where the light bulbs were wrapped in blue gelatin, I knew the sound. It
   was the music of a Midwestern high school dance in some rented club. And
   not just the music; the crowded, low-ceilinged room, the makeshift bar,
   doors opening onto a brick terrace, people giggling and shouting and
   drinking booze out of paper cups -- it was all exactly the same, except
   that every head in the room was black.

   Seeing this made me a bit self-conscious and I began looking around for a
   dark corner where I could drink without being seen. My date still had me
   by the arm, but I shook her off and moved toward one corner of the room.
   No one paid any attention to me as I eased through the mob, bumping
   dancers here and there, keeping my head lowered and moving cautiously
   toward what looked like a vacant spot.

   A few feet to my left was a door and I edged toward it, bumping more
   dancers. When I finally got outside I felt like I'd escaped from a jail.
   The air was cool and the terrace was almost empty. I walked out to the
   edge and looked down on Charlotte Amalie at the bottom of the hill. I
   could hear music floating up from the bars along Queen Street. Off to my
   right and left I could see Land Rovers and open taxis full of people
   moving along the waterfront, heading for other parties, other yachts and
   dim-lit hotels where red and blue lights glittered mysteriously. I tried
   to remember which other places we'd been told to go for the "real fun,"
   and I wondered if they were any better than this one.

   I thought of Vieques, and for a moment I wanted to be there. I remembered
   sitting on the hotel balcony and hearing the hoofbeats in the street
   below. Then I remembered Zimburger, and Martin, and the Marines -- the
   empire builders, setting up frozen food stores and aerial bombing ranges,
   spreading out like a piss puddle to every corner of the world.

   I turned to watch the dancers, thinking that since I'd paid six dollars to
   get into this place, I might as well try to enjoy it.

   The dancing was getting wilder now. No more swaying fox-trot business.
   There was a driving rhythm to the music; the movements on the floor were
   jerky and full of lust, a swinging and thrusting of hips, accompanied by
   sudden cries and groans. I felt a temptation to join in, if only for
   laughs. But first I would have to get drunker.

   On the other side of the room I found Yeamon, standing by the entrance to
   the hall. "I'm ready to do the dinga," I said with a laugh. "Let's cut
   loose and go crazy."

   He glared at me, taking a long slug of his drink.

   I shrugged and moved on toward the hall closet, where the button-down
   bartender was laboring over the drinks. "Rum and ice," I shouted, holding
   my cup aloft. "Heavy on the ice."

   He seized it mechanically, dropped in a few lumps of ice, a flash of rum,
   then he handed it back. I stabbed a quarter into his palm and went back to
   the doorway. Yeamon was staring at the dancers, looking very morose.

   I stopped beside him and he nodded toward the floor. "Look at that bitch,"
   he said.

   I looked and saw Chenault, dancing with the small, spade-bearded man we
   had met earlier. He was a good dancer, and whatever step he was doing was
   pretty involved. Chenault was holding her arms out like a hula charmer, a
   look of tense concentration on her face. Now and then she would spin,
   swirling her madras skirt around her like a fan.

   "Yeah," I said. "She's hell on this dancing."

   "She's part nigger," he replied, in a tone that was not soft.

   "Careful," I said quickly. "Watch what you say in this place."

   "Balls," he said loudly.

   Great Jesus, I thought. Here we go. "Take it easy," I said. "Why don't we
   head back to town?"

   "Fine with me," he replied. "Try talking to her." He nodded at Chenault,
   dancing feverishly just a few feet away.

   "Hell," I said. "Just grab her. Let's go."

   He shook his head. "I did. She screamed like I was killing her."

   There was something in his voice that I'd never heard before, an odd
   wavering that suddenly made me nervous. "Jesus," I muttered, looking
   around at the crowd.

   "I'll just have to bat her in the head," he said.

   Just then I felt a hand on my arm. It was my pig, my squatty date. "Let's
   go, big boy!" she whooped, dragging me onto the floor. "Let's do it!" She
   squealed and began to stomp her feet

   Good God, I thought. What now? I watched her, holding my drink in one hand
   and a cigarette in the other. "Come on!" she shouted. "Give me some
   business!" She hunched toward me, pulling her skirt up around her thighs
   as she wiggled back and forth. I began to stomp and weave; my dancing was
   shaky at first, then I leveled out to a sort of distracted abandon.
   Somebody bumped me and I dropped my drink on the floor. It made no
   difference to the frenzied couples that hemmed us in.

   Suddenly I was next to Chenault. I shrugged helplessly and kept up the
   stomp. She laughed and bumped me with her hips. Then she danced back to
   her partner, leaving me with my pig.

   Finally I shook my head and quit, making gestures to indicate I was too
   tired to go on. I went back to the bar for a fresh drink. Yeamon was
   nowhere in sight and I presumed he'd been sucked into the dance. I made my
   way through the bodies and out to the terrace, hoping for a place to sit
   down. Yeamon was sitting on the railing, talking to a teenage girl. He
   looked up with a smile. "This is Ginny," he said. "She's going to teach me
   the dance."

   I nodded and said hello. Behind us the music was growing wilder, and at
   times it was almost drowned out by the screaming of the crowd. I tried to
   ignore it, looking out over the town, seeing the peace below us and
   wanting to be down there.

   But the music from the house was getting crazier. There was a new urgency
   about it, and the shouts of the mob took on a different tone. Yeamon and
   Ginny went in to see what was happening. The crowd was moving back to make
   room for something, and I walked over to see what it was.

   They had made a big circle, and in the middle of it. Chenault and the
   small, spade-bearded man were doing the dance. Chenault had dropped her
   skirt and was dancing in her panties and her white sleeveless blouse. Her
   partner had taken off his shirt exposing his glistening black chest. He
   wore nothing but a pair of tight, red toreador pants. Both of them were
   barefoot.

   I looked at Yeamon. His face was tense as he stood on tiptoe to watch.
   Suddenly he called her name. "Chenault!" But the crowd was making so much
   noise that I could barely hear him three feet away. She seemed oblivious
   to everything but the music and the freak who led her around the floor.
   Yeamon called again, but nobody heard.

   Now, as if in some kind of trance, Chenault began to unbutton her blouse.
   She popped the buttons slowly, like a practiced stripper, then flung the
   blouse aside and pranced there in nothing but her bra and panties. I
   thought the crowd would go crazy. They howled and pounded on furniture,
   shoving and climbing on each other to get a better view. The whole house
   shook and I thought the floor might cave in. Somewhere across the room I
   heard glass breaking.

   I looked again at Yeamon. He was waving his hands in the air now, trying
   to get Chenault's attention. But he looked like just another witness,
   carried away with the spectacle.

   Now they were close together and I saw the brute reach around Chenault and
   unhook the strap of her bra. He undid it quickly, expertly, and she seemed
   unaware that now she wore nothing but her thin silk panties. The bra slid
   down her arms and fell to the floor. Her breasts bounced violently with
   the jerk and thrust of the dance. Full, pink-nippled halls of flesh,
   suddenly cut loose from the cotton modesty of a New York bra.

   I watched, fascinated and terrified, and then I heard Yeamon beside me as
   he lunged toward the dance floor. There was a commotion and then I saw the
   big bartender move up behind him and grab his arms. Several others pushed
   him back, treating him like a harmless drunk as they made room for the
   dance to go on.

   Yeamon was screaming hysterically, struggling to keep his balance.
   "Chenault!" he shouted. "What the hell are you doing?" He sounded
   desperate, but I felt paralyzed.

   They were coming together again, weaving slowly toward the middle of the
   circle. The noise was an overpowering roar from two hundred wild throats.
   Chenault still wore that dazed, ecstatic expression as the man reached out
   and eased her panties over her hips and down to her knees. She let them
   drop silently on the floor, then stepped away, breaking into the dance
   again, moving against him, freezing there for a moment -- even the music
   paused -- then dancing away, opening her eyes and flinging her hair from
   side to side.

   Suddenly Yeamon broke loose. He leaped into the circle and they were on
   him immediately, but this time he was harder to pin. I saw him smack the
   bartender in the face, using his arms and elbows to keep them off,
   screaming with such a fury that the sound of it sent chills up my spine,
   and finally going down under a wave of bodies.

   The melee stopped the dance. For an instant I saw Chenault standing alone;
   she looked surprised and bewildered, with that little muff of brown hair
   standing out against the white skin, and her blonde hair falling around
   her shoulders. She looked small and naked and helpless, and then I saw the
   man grab her arm and start pulling her toward the door.

   I staggered through the crowd, cursing, shoving, trying to get to the hall
   before they disappeared. Behind me I could hear Yeamon, still yelling, but
   I knew they had him now and my only thought was to find Chenault. Several
   people whacked me before I got to the door, but I paid no attention. Once
   I thought I heard her scream, but it could have been anyone.

   When I finally got outside I saw a crowd at the bottom of the stairs. I
   hurried down and found Yeamon lying there on the ground bleeding from the
   mouth and groaning. Apparently they had dragged him out a back door. The
   bartender was leaning over him and wiping his mouth with a handkerchief.

   I forgot about Chenault and shoved through the ring of people, mumbling
   apologies as I made my way to where Yeamon was stretched out. When I got
   there the bartender looked up and said, "Is this your friend?"

   I nodded, bending down to see if he was hurt.

   "He's okay," somebody said. "We tried to be easy with him, but he kept
   swinging."

   "Yeah," I said.

   Yeamon was sitting up now, holding his head in his hands. "Chenault," he
   mumbled. "What the hell are you doing?"

   I put my hand on his shoulder. "Okay," I said. "Take it easy."

   "That filthy sonofabitch," he said loudly.

   The bartender tapped me on the arm. "You better get him out of here," he
   said. "He's not hurt now, but he will be if he stays around."

   "Can we get a cab?" I asked.

   He nodded. "I'll get you a car." He stepped back and yelled across the
   crowd. Somebody answered and he pointed at me.

   "Chenault!" Yeamon shouted, trying to get up off the ground.

   I shoved him back down, knowing that the moment he got up we'd have
   another fight. I looked up at the bartender. "Where's the girl?" I said.
   "What happened to her?"

   He smiled faintly. "She enjoyed herself?"

   I realized then that we were going to be sent off without Chenault. "Where
   is she?" I said too loudly, trying to keep the panic out of my voice.

   A stranger stepped up to me and snarled, "Man, you better get out."

   I shuffled nervously in the dirt, looking back at the bartender, who
   seemed to be in charge. He smiled maliciously, pointing behind me. I
   turned and saw a car coming slowly through the crowd. "Here's your cab,"
   he said. "I'll get your friend." He stepped over to Yeamon and jerked him
   to his feet. "Big man go to town," he said with a grin. "Leave little girl
   here."

   Yeamon stiffened and began to shout "You bastards!" He swung savagely at
   the bartender, who dodged easily and laughed while four men shoved Yeamon
   into the car. They shoved me in after him, and I leaned out the window to
   yell at the bartender: "I'll be back with the police -- that girl better
   be all right." Suddenly I felt an awful jolt on the side of my face, and I
   drew back just in time to let the second punch go flying past my nose.
   Without quite knowing what I was doing, I rolled up the window and fell
   back on the seat I heard them all laughing as we started down the hill.

   Sixteen

   All I could think about was getting the police, but the driver of the car
   refused to take us to the station or even tell us where it was. "Better
   forget it," he said quietly. "Everybody mind his own business." He let us
   out in the middle of town and said it would be all right if we gave him
   two dollars to pay for the gas. I grumbled bitterly and gave it to him,
   but Yeamon refused to get out of the car. He kept insisting that we were
   going back up the hill to get Chenault.

   "Come on," I said, tugging at his arm. "We'll get the cops. They'll take
   us up." Finally I got him out and the car pulled away.

   We found the police station, but there was nobody in it. The lights were
   on and we went in to wait. Yeamon passed out on a bench and I was so
   groggy that I could barely keep my eyes open. After about an hour I
   decided we'd be better off looking for a cop in the streets. I woke Yeamon
   up and we started down toward the bars. The carnival was dissipating now
   and the streets were full of drunks, mostly tourists and Puerto Ricans.
   Little knots of people wandered from bar to bar, passing bodies in
   doorways, and a few just sprawled on the sidewalk. It was almost four, but
   the bars were still full of people. It looked like the town had been
   bombed. There was no sign of a cop anywhere, and by this time we were both
   ready to fall down from exhaustion. Finally we gave up and took a cab out
   to Lindbergh Beach, where we dragged ourselves over the fence and fell
   down in the sand to sleep.

   Sometime during the night it started raining and when I woke up I was
   soaking wet I thought it was dawn, but when I looked at my watch it said
   nine o'clock. My head felt swollen to twice its normal size and there was
   a big, painful bump in front of my right ear. I took off my clothes and
   went into the bay for a swim, but it made me feel worse instead of better.
   The morning was cold and dreary, and a light rain peppered the water. I
   sat on the raft for a while and thought about the night before. The more I
   remembered, the more depressed I became, and I dreaded the idea of going
   back into town to look for Chenault. At that point I didn't really care if
   she lived or died. All I wanted was to walk across the road and get on a
   plane for San Juan, leaving Yeamon asleep on the beach and hoping I'd
   never see either one of them again.

   After a while I swam in and woke him up. He looked sick. We went to the
   airport for breakfast, then got a bus to town. After getting our clothes
   off the boat at Yacht Haven, we went to the police station, where the
   gendarme on duty was playing solitaire with a deck of cards that showed
   naked women in various lustful poses.

   He grinned and looked up when Yeamon finished talking. "Man," he said
   slowly, "what can I do about your girl if she likes somebody else?"

   "Likes, hell!" Yeamon shouted. "She was dragged off!"

   "Okay," he said, still smiling. "I live here all my life an' I know how
   girls get dragged off at carnivals." He laughed softly. "You tell me she
   had all her clothes off, dancin' for all those people -- and then you say
   she was raped?"

   The cop made several more remarks of the same kind, and finally Yeamon's
   eyes got wild and he began to shout in a voice that was angry and
   desperate. "Listen!" he yelled. "If you don't do something about this I'm
   going up to that house with a goddamn butcher knife and kill everybody I
   see!"

   The cop looked startled. "Take it easy, mon. You heading for real trouble
   if you keep runnin' your mouth."

   "Look," I said. "All we want you to do is go up there with us and find the
   girl -- is that too much to ask?"

   He looked down at his cards for a moment, as if by consulting them he
   could divine the meaning of our appearance, and what to do about it.
   Finally he shook his head sadly and looked up. "Ah, you troublesome
   people," he said quietly. "You jus' can't learn."

   Before we could say anything, he stood up and put on his pith helmet.
   "Okay," he said. "Let's go take a look."

   We followed him into the street. His attitude made me nervous, almost
   embarrassed for the trouble we were causing.

   By the time we pulled up in front of the house I wanted to jump out and
   run away. Whatever we found was going to be bad. Maybe they had taken her
   somewhere else, to some other party, and staked her out on a bed, a white,
   pink-nippled nightcap to wind up the carnival. I shuddered as we went up
   the stairs, then I glanced over at Yeamon. He looked like a man on his way
   to the guillotine. The cop rang the bell and it was answered by a
   meek-looking black woman who stuttered nervously and swore she had seen
   nothing of a white girl and knew nothing about a party the night before.

   "Balls!" Yeamon snapped. "You had a hell of a party here last night and I
   paid six dollars to get into it."

   The woman denied having knowledge of any party. She said there were people
   sleeping inside, but no white girl.

   The cop asked if he could come in and take a look. She shrugged and let
   him in, but when Yeamon tried to follow she got excited and shut the door
   in his face.

   In a few minutes the cop reappeared. "No sign of a white girl," he said,
   looking Yeamon straight in the eye.

   I didn't want to believe him because I didn't want to face the other
   possibilities. This should have been simple -- find her, wake her up, and
   take her away. But now nothing was simple. She might be anywhere, behind
   any door on the island. I looked at Yeamon, expecting him to run amok and
   start swinging at any moment. But he was slumped against the porch railing
   and he looked ready to cry. "Oh jesus lord," he muttered, staring down at
   his shoes. It was such a genuine despair that the cop put his hand on
   Yeamon's shoulder.

   "Sorry, mon," he said quietly. "Come on now. Let's go."

   We drove back down the hill to the station and the cop promised to look
   for a girl of Chenault's description. "I'll tell the others," he said.
   "She'll turn up." He smiled kindly at Yeamon. "You got no business lettin'
   a woman run you 'round in circles like this anyhow."

   "Yeah," Yeamon replied. Then he put Chenault's raincoat and her small
   suitcase on the desk. "Give this to her when she turns up," he said. "I
   don't feel like lugging it around."

   The cop nodded and put her clothes on a shelf in the hack of the room.
   Then he wrote down my address in San Juan so he could send a message if
   they found her. We said goodbye and walked down the street to the Grand
   Hotel for breakfast.

   We ordered rum and ice with hamburgers and ate them in silence while we
   read the newspapers. Finally, Yeamon looked up and said casually, "She's
   just a whore. I don't know why this should bother me."

   "Don't worry about it," I said. "She went crazy -- totally crazy."

   "You're right," he said. "She's a whore. I knew it the first time I saw
   her." He leaned back in the booth. "I met her at a party on Staten Island
   about a week before I came down here; the minute I saw her I said to
   myself, now this girl is a rattling fine whore -- not the money type, but
   the type that just wants to hump." He nodded. "She came back to my place
   with me and I fell on her like a bull. She stayed there all week, didn't
   even go to work. At the time I was staying with a friend of my brother's
   and I made him sleep on a cot in the kitchen -- pretty much ran him out of
   his own place." He smiled sadly. "Then when I left for San Juan she wanted
   to come with me -- it was all I could do to make her wait a few weeks."

   I had several Chenaults on my mind right then: a chic little girl in New
   York with a secret lust and a Lord & Taylor wardrobe; a tan little girl
   with long blonde hair, walking on the beach in a white bikini; a yelling,
   drunken hellion in a loud St. Thomas bar; and then the girl I had seen
   last night -- dancing in those flimsy panties and bouncing those
   pink-nippled breasts, weaving her hips while a crazy thug pulled the
   panties down her legs. . . and then that last glimpse, standing in the
   middle of the room, alone for just an instant, that little muff of brown
   hair standing out like a beacon against the white flesh of her belly and
   thighs. . . that sacred little muff, carefully nurtured by parents who
   knew all too well its power and its value, sent off to Smith College for
   cultivation and slight exposure to the wind and weather of life, tended
   for twenty years by a legion of parents and teachers and friends and
   advisers, then farmed out to New York on a wing and a prayer.

   We finished breakfast and took a bus to the airport. The lobby was jammed
   with pitiful drunkards: men dragging each other into bathrooms, women sick
   on the floor in front of benches, tourists babbling with fear. I took one
   look at the scene and knew that we might wait all day and all night before
   we got a seat on a plane. Without tickets, we might be here for three
   days. It looked hopeless. Then we had a wild piece of luck. We had gone to
   the coffee shop and were looking around for a seat when I saw the pilot
   who had flown me over to Vieques on Thursday. He seemed to recognize me as
   I approached. "Ho," I said. "Remember me? Kemp -- New York Times."

   He smiled and held out his hand. "That's right," he said. "You were with
   Zimburger."

   "Pure coincidence," I said with a grin. "Say, can I hire you to take us
   back to San Juan? We're desperate."

   "Sure," he said. "I'm going back at four. I have two passengers and two
   empty seats." He nodded. "You're lucky you found me this early -- I
   wouldn't have had them long."

   "Christ," I said. "You've saved our lives. Charge me anything you want --
   I'll bill it to Zimburger."

   He grinned broadly. "Well, glad to hear that. I can't think of anybody I'd
   rather ram it to." He finished his coffee and put the cup on the counter.
   "Got to run now," he said. "Be on the runway at four -- it's the same red
   Apache."

   "Don't worry," I said. "We'll be there."

   The mob was piling up now. A plane left for San Juan every half hour, but
   all the seats were reserved. The people waiting for vacancies were
   beginning to get drunk again, hauling out bottles of scotch and passing
   them around.

   It was impossible to think. I wanted peace, the privacy of my own
   apartment, a glass instead of a paper cup, four walls between me and this
   stinking mob of drunks that pressed on us from all sides.

   At four we went out to the runway and found the Apache warming up. The
   flight back took about thirty minutes. With us was a young couple from
   Atlanta; they had come over from San Juan earlier in the day and now they
   couldn't get back soon enough. They were absolutely appalled by the wild
   and uppity nigras.

   I was tempted to tell them about Chenault, giving them all the details and
   finishing up with a hideous vision of where she was now, and what she was
   doing. Instead, I sat quietly and stared down at the white clouds. I felt
   like I'd survived a long and perilous binge, and now I was going home.

   My car was in the airport lot where I'd left it, and Yeamon's scooter was
   chained to a railing by the attendant's shack. He unlocked it and said he
   was going on out to his house, despite my advice that he stay at my place
   so he could pick her up if she came in sometime during the night.

   "Hell," I said. "She might already be back for that matter. For all we
   know, she thought we abandoned her last night, so she went to the
   airport."

   "Yeah," he said, jerking the scooter off its stand. "That must be what
   happened, Kemp. Maybe she'll have dinner ready when I get back to the
   house."

   I followed him out the long driveway and waved goodbye as I turned off on
   the highway toward San Juan. When I got back to the apartment I went to
   sleep immediately and didn't wake up until noon the next day.

   On my way down to the office I wondered if I should say anything about
   Chenault, but the moment I walked into the newsroom I forgot all about
   her. Sala called me over to his desk, where he was talking excitedly with
   Schwartz and Moberg. "It's all over," he yelled. "You should have stayed
   in St Thomas." Segarra had quit and Lotterman had left the night before
   for Miami, presumably in a last-ditch effort to get new financing. Sala
   was convinced the paper was going under, but Moberg thought it was a false
   alarm. "Lotterman has plenty," he assured us. "He went to see his daughter
   -- he told me right before he left."

   Sala laughed bitterly. "Wake up, Moberg -- do you think Greasy Nick would
   have dumped a soft job like this if he didn't have to? Face it, we're
   unemployed."

   "Goddamnit," Schwartz exclaimed. "I was just getting settled here -- this
   is the first job I've had in ten years that I wanted to keep." Schwartz
   was about forty and although I didn't see much of him except at work, I
   liked him. He did a good job on the desk, never bothered anybody, and
   spent his free time drinking in the most expensive bars he could find. He
   hated Al's, he said; it was too clubby, and dirty besides. He liked the
   Marlin Club and the Caribe Lounge and the other hotel bars where a man
   could wear a tie and drink in peace and occasionally see a good floor
   show. He worked hard, and when he finished working he drank. After that he
   slept, and then he went back to work. Journalism to Schwartz was a jigsaw
   puzzle a simple process of putting a paper together so that everything
   fit. Nothing more. He considered it an honorable trade and he'd learned it
   well; he had it down to a formula and he was damn well going to keep it
   that way. Nothing annoyed him more than a screwball or a crank. They made
   his life difficult and caused him to brood endlessly.

   Sala grinned at him. "Don't worry, Schwartz -- you'll get a pension --
   probably forty acres and a mule, too."

   I remembered Schwartz's first appearance at the News. He wandered into the
   newsroom and asked for a job the same way he'd walk into a barbershop and
   ask for a haircut, and with no more idea of being turned down. Now, if
   there was another English-language paper in town, the collapse of the News
   would mean no more to Schwartz than the death of his favorite barber. It
   wasn't the loss of a job that upset him, but the fact that his pattern was
   being threatened. If the paper folded, he'd be forced into some strange
   and irregular action. And Schwartz was not that way. He was perfectly
   capable of doing a strange and irregular thing, but only if he'd planned
   it Anything done on the spur of the moment was not only stupid, but
   immoral. Like going to the Caribe without a tie. He viewed Moberg's way of
   life as a criminal shame and called him "that job-hopping degenerate." I
   knew it was Schwartz who had put into Lotterman's head the idea that
   Moberg was a thief.

   Sala looked up at me. "Schwartz is afraid they'll cut off his credit at
   the Marlin and he'll lose that special seat at the end of the bar -- the
   one they save for the dean of the white journalists."

   Schwartz shook his head sadly. "You cynical fool. We'll see how you feel
   when you start looking for a job."

   Sala got up and started for the darkroom. "No more jobs in this place," he
   said. "When Greasy Nick jumps ship, you can bet the word is out."

   A few hours later we went across the street for a drink. I told Sala about
   Chenault and he twisted nervously in his seat as I talked.

   "Man, that's awful!" he exclaimed when I finished. "Christ, it makes me
   sick!" He whacked the table with his fist. "Goddamnit, I knew something
   like that would happen -- didn't I tell you?"

   I nodded, staring down at my ice.

   "Why the hell didn't you do something?" he demanded. "Yeamon's pretty good
   at slapping people around -- where was he all that time?"

   "It happened too fast," I said. "He tried to stop it, but they stomped
   him."

   He thought for a moment. "Why did you take her to that place?"

   "Come on," I said. "I didn't go over there to play chaperon to some
   lunatic girl." I looked across the table at him. "Why didn't you stay home
   and read a good book the night you got whipped by the cops?"

   He shook his head and fell back in the booth. After two or three minutes
   of silence, he looked up. "What the hell are we heading for, Kemp? I'm
   really beginning to think we're all doomed." He scratched his face
   nervously and lowered his voice. "I'm serious," he said. "We keep getting
   drunk and these terrible things keep happening and each one is worse than
   the last. . ." He waved his hand in a gesture of hopelessness. "Hell, it's
   no fun anymore -- our luck's all running out at the same time."

   When we got back to the office I thought about what he'd said, and I began
   to think that Sala might be right. He talked about luck and fate and
   numbers coming up, yet he never ventured a nickel at the casinos because
   he knew the house had all the percentages. And beneath his pessimism, his
   bleak conviction that all the machinery was rigged against him, at the
   bottom of his soul was a faith that he was going to outwit it, that by
   carefully watching the signs he was going to know when to dodge and be
   spared. It was fatalism with a loophole, and all you had to do to make it
   work was never miss a sign. Survival by coordination, as it were. The race
   is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but to those who can
   see it coming and jump aside. Like a frog evading a shillelagh in a
   midnight marsh.

   So, with this theory firmly in mind, I went to see Sanderson that night,
   meaning to leap from the bog of threatened unemployment to the high-dry
   branch of fat assignments. It was the only branch I could see within a
   thousand miles, and if I missed it, it meant a long haul to a new
   foothold, and I didn't have the faintest idea where it would be.

   He greeted me with a fifty-dollar check, which I saw as a good omen. "For
   that article," he explained. "Come on out to the porch, we'll get you a
   drink."

   "Drink, hell," I said. "I'm looking for unemployment insurance."

   He laughed. "I might have known -- especially after today."

   We stopped in the kitchen to get some ice. "Of course you knew Segarra was
   going to quit," I said.

   "Of course," he replied.

   "Jesus," I muttered. "Tell me, Hal -- just what does the future hold for
   me? Am I going to get rich, or go to the dogs?"

   He laughed and started for the porch, where I could hear other voices.
   "Don't worry," he said over his shoulder. "Come on out where it's cool."

   I didn't feel like dealing with a bunch of new people, but I went out to
   the porch anyway. They were young and they had all just come from
   somewhere exciting, and they were very very interested in Puerto Rico and
   all its possibilities. I felt successful and au courant. After days of
   being blown and buffeted in the rotten winds of life, it was nice to be
   back on the inside.

   Seventeen

   I was awakened the next morning by a tapping on my door, a soft, yet
   urgent tapping. Don't answer it, I thought, don't let it happen. I sat up
   in bed and stared at the door for a minute. I groaned, putting my head
   down in my hands and wanting to be anywhere in the world but here and
   involved in this thing; then I got up and walked slowly over to the door.

   She was wearing the same clothes, but now she looked haggard and dirty.
   The delicate illusions that get us through life can only stand so much
   strain -- and now, looking at Chenault, I wanted to slam the door and go
   back to bed.

   "Good morning," I said.

   She said nothing.

   "Come in," I said finally, stepping back to clear the doorway.

   She kept staring at me with an expression that made me more nervous than
   ever. It was humiliation and shock, I suppose, but there was something
   else in it -- a shade of sadness and amusement that was almost a smile.

   It was a frightening thing to see, and the longer I looked at it the more
   convinced I was that she'd lost her mind. Then she walked in and put her
   straw pocketbook on the kitchen table. "This is nice," she said in a quiet
   voice, looking around the apartment.

   "Yeah," I said. "It's okay."

   "I didn't know where you lived," she said. "I had to call the newspaper."

   "How did you get here?" I asked.

   "A cab." She nodded toward the door. "He's waiting outside. I don't have
   any money."

   "Jesus," I said. "Well, I'll go out and pay him -- how much is it?"

   She shook her head. "I don't know."

   I found my wallet and started for the door. Then I realized I was wearing
   nothing but shorts. I went back to the closet and pulled on my pants, half
   desperate to get out of the place and organize my thoughts. "Don't worry,"
   I said. "I'll get it."

   "I know," she said wearily. "Could I lie down?"

   "Sure," I said quickly, hopping over to the bed. "Here, I'll straighten it
   out for you -- it's one of those beds that turns into a couch." I pulled
   up the sheets and tucked the spread around them, snatching at the wrinkles
   like a charwoman.

   She sat down on the bed, looking at me as I pulled on a shirt. "This is a
   wonderful apartment," she said. "So much sun."

   "Yeah," I replied as I moved toward the door. "Well, I'll pay the cab now
   -- see you in a minute." Then I ran down the steps to the street. He
   smiled happily as I came toward him. "How much is it?" I said, opening my
   wallet.

   He nodded eagerly. "Si, bueno. Senorita say you pay. Bueno, gracias.
   Senorita is not okay." He pointed meaningfully at his head.

   "That's right," I said. "Cuanto es?"

   "Ah, si," he replied, holding up seven fingers. "Seven dolares, si."

   "Are you nuts!" I said.

   "Si," he said quickly. "We go all over, around and around, stop here, stop
   there. . ." He shook his head again. "Ah, si, two hours, loco, senorita
   say you pay."

   I gave him seven dollars, assuming he was lying, but believing him when he
   said the morning had been loco. No doubt it had been, and now it was my
   turn. I watched him drive off, then I went over to a spot under the
   flamboyan tree, out of sight of the windows. What the hell am I going to
   do with her? I thought I was barefoot and the sand was cool under my feet
   I looked up at the tree, then over to the window of my apartment. She was
   in there, already on the bed. Here the News was about to fold and suddenly
   I had a penniless girl on my hands -- and a nut, to boot. What could I say
   to Yeamon, or even Sala? The whole thing was too much. I decided I would
   have to get her off my hands, even if it meant paying her way back to New
   York.

   I went upstairs and opened the door, feeling more relaxed, now that I'd
   made up my mind. She was stretched out on the bed, staring up at the
   ceiling.

   "Have you had any breakfast?" I asked, trying to sound cheerful.

   "No," she replied, so softly that I barely heard.

   "Well I have everything," I said. "Eggs, bacon, coffee, the whole
   business." I went over to the sink. "How about some orange juice?"

   "Orange juice would be fine," she said, still staring at the ceiling.

   I cooked a pan of bacon and scrambled some eggs, happy for something to
   keep me busy. Now and then I would glance back at the bed. She was lying
   on her back with her arms folded across her stomach.

   "Chenault," I said finally. "Do you feel okay?"

   "I'm fine," she replied in the same dull voice.

   I turned around. "Maybe I should call a doctor."

   "No," she said. "I'm fine. I just want to rest."

   I shrugged and went back to the stove. I put the eggs and bacon on two
   plates and poured two glasses of milk. "Here," I said, taking her plate
   over to the bed. "Eat this and see if you feel any better."

   She didn't move and I put the plate down on a table beside the bed. "You
   better eat," I said. "You look pretty damn unhealthy."

   She kept staring at the ceiling. "I know," she whispered. "Just let me
   rest awhile."

   "Fine with me," I said. "I have to go to work anyway." I went to the
   kitchen and drank two mouthfuls of warm rum, then I took a shower and got
   dressed. When I left, the food on her table was untouched. "See you about
   eight," I said. "Call the paper if you need anything."

   "I will," she said. "Goodbye."

   I spent most of the day in the library, taking notes on previous
   anti-communist investigations and looking for background material on
   people involved in hearings that were scheduled to start on Thursday. I
   avoided Sala, hoping he wouldn't come looking for me to ask for news of
   Chenault. At six o'clock Lotterman called from Miami, telling Schwartz to
   handle the paper and saying he'd be back on Friday with "good news." It
   could only mean that he'd found some financing; the paper would last a
   little longer and I still had my job.

   I left about seven. There was nothing else to do and I didn't want to get
   caught in some movement to Al's. I went down the back stairs and slipped
   into my car like a fugitive. Somewhere in Santurce I ran over a dog, but I
   kept going. When I got to the apartment Chenault was still asleep.

   I made some sandwiches and a pot of coffee, and while I was clattering
   around in the kitchen she woke up. "Hello," she said quietly.

   "Hello," I said, not turning around. I opened a can of tomato soup and put
   it on to heat. "You want something to eat?" I asked.

   "I think so," she said, sitting up on the bed. "I'll fix it, though."

   "It's already fixed," I said. "How do you feel?"

   "Better," she said. "Much better."

   I took a ham sandwich and a bowl of soup over to the bed. The bacon and
   eggs from breakfast were still sitting there, looking cold and withered. I
   took the plate off the table and put the other food down in its place.

   She looked up and smiled. "You're such a good person, Paul."

   "I'm not good," I said on my way back to the kitchen. "Just a little
   confused."

   "Why?" she said. "Because of what happened?"

   I took my food over to a table by the window and sat down. "Yeah," I said
   after a pause. "Your. . . ah. . . your maneuvers of the past few days have
   been. . . ah. . . sort of obscure, to say the least"

   She looked down at her hands. "Why did you let me in?" she said finally.

   I shrugged. "I don't know -- did you think I wouldn't?"

   "I didn't know," she replied. "I didn't know how you'd feel." .

   "Neither did I," I said.

   Suddenly she looked up at me. "I didn't know what to do!" she blurted.
   "When I got on that plane I hoped it would crash! I wanted it to blow up
   and sink in the ocean!"

   "Where'd you get a plane ticket?" I said. "I thought you didn't have any
   money." I asked without thinking, and the minute the words came out of my
   mouth I regretted them.

   She looked startled, then she began to cry. "Somebody bought it for me,"
   she sobbed. "I didn't have any money, I --"

   "Never mind," I said quickly. "I didn't mean to ask anyway. I was playing
   journalist."

   She put her face down in her hands and kept crying. I resumed eating until
   she quieted down, then I looked over at her again. "Look," I said. "Let's
   start everything from right now. I'll just assume you've had a bad
   experience and I won't ask any more questions, okay?"

   She nodded, without looking up.

   "All I want to know," I added, "is what you plan to do now." She looked
   like she was going to cry again and I quickly added: "Just so I can help
   out."

   She sobbed, then said, "What does Fritz think?"

   "Well," I said. "He wasn't real happy when I last saw him. Of course that
   was Sunday night and we were both in pretty bad shape -- he might feel
   better by now."

   She looked up. "What happened -- did he get in a fight?"

   I stared at her.

   "Don't look at me that way!" she screamed. "I don't remember!"

   I shrugged. "Well --"

   "The last thing I remember is going into that house," she said, starting
   to cry again. "I don't remember anything else until the next day!"

   She fell down on the bed and cried for a long time. I went to the kitchen
   and poured a cup of coffee. I was tempted to drive her out to Yeamon's and
   leave her on the road behind his house. I thought about it for a while,
   but decided I'd better talk to him first and find out how he felt. For all
   I knew he might break both her arms if she showed up out there in the dead
   of night with this malignant-sounding story. The little she'd said was
   enough to kill any hopes I'd had that it was all a mistake, and now I
   didn't want to hear any more. The sooner I could get her out of here, the
   better. If I didn't see Yeamon in town the next day, I would drive out to
   his house after work.

   She finally stopped crying and went to sleep. I sat by the window and read
   for a few hours, sipping the rum until I got sleepy. Then I shoved her
   over to one side of the bed and very carefully stretched out on the other.

   When I woke up the next morning Chenault was already in the kitchen. "It's
   my turn to do something," she said with a bright smile. "You just sit
   there and be waited on."

   She brought me a glass of orange juice, then a big omelette, and we both
   sat on the bed and ate. She seemed relaxed and talked about having the
   place cleaned up by the time I got back from work. I had meant to tell her
   that I was going to see Yeamon and have her off my hands by nightfall, but
   now the idea of saying it made me feel like an ogre. What the hell, I
   thought. No sense telling her -- just do it.

   She brought the coffee over on a little tray. "Right after this I'm going
   to take a shower," she said. "Do you mind?"

   I laughed. "Yes, Chenault, I forbid you to use the shower."

   She smiled, and when she finished her coffee she went into the bathroom
   and I heard the water turn on. I went to the kitchen for another cup of
   coffee. I felt slightly indecent, wearing nothing but my shorts, and
   decided to get dressed before she came out of the shower. First I went
   downstairs to get the paper. As I came back through the door I heard her
   call from the bathroom: "Paul, can you come here a minute?"

   I went over and opened the door, thinking she would have the curtain
   pulled. She didn't, and greeted me with a big smile. "I feel human again,"
   she exclaimed. "Aren't I beautiful?" She stepped out of the stream of
   water and faced me, lifting her arms like a model demonstrating some new
   and unusual soap. There was such a weird, nymphet egotism about her stance
   that I had to laugh.

   "Come on in," she said happily. "This is wonderful!"

   I stopped laughing and there was an odd silence. I heard a gong somewhere
   in the back of my brain, and then a melodramatic voice saying, "And this
   concludes The Adventures of Paul Kemp, the Drunken Journalist. He read the
   signs and saw it coming, but he was too much of a lecher to step out of
   the way." Then there was organ music, a sort of feverish dirge, and then I
   was stepping out of my shorts and into the shower with Chenault. I
   remember the feel of those soapy little hands washing my back, keeping my
   eyes tightly shut while my soul fought a hopeless battle with my groin,
   then giving up like a drowning man and soaking the bed with our bodies.

   She was stretched out with a peaceful smile on her face, still wet from
   the shower, when I finally left for work. All the way into San Juan I
   drove blindly, muttering and shaking my head like a man who has finally
   been tracked down.

   When I got to the office there were two things on my desk: one was a small
   book titled 72 Sure-Fire Ways to Have Fun, and the other was a note saying
   Sanderson wanted me to call him.

   I checked with Schwartz to see if there were any assignments. There
   weren't, so I went out for some coffee, walking several blocks down the
   waterfront to avoid any possibility of meeting Sala. I also expected
   Yeamon to come bounding into the office at any moment. It took me a while
   to compose myself, but finally I decided that the morning had never
   happened. Nothing had changed. I would see Yeamon and get her off my
   hands. If he didn't come into town, I would drive out there after work.

   When I felt myself under control I went back to the office. At two-thirty
   I had to go to the Caribe to talk to one of the Congressmen who had come
   down for the anti-communist investigation. I drove over there and talked
   to the man for two hours. We sat on the terrace and drank rum punch, and
   when I left he thanked me for the "valuable information" I had given him.

   "Okay, Senator," I said. "Thanks for the story -- it's a hot one." Back at
   the office I was hard-pressed to get four paragraphs out of the entire
   conversation.

   Then I called Sanderson. "How're you coming on that brochure?" he asked.

   "Oh Jesus," I muttered.

   "Damnit, Paul, you promised me a first draft this week. You're worse than
   this fellow Yeamon."

   "All right," I said wearily. "I'm going nuts right now, Hal. I'll get it
   to you this weekend, maybe Monday."

   "What's wrong?" he said.

   "Never mind," I replied. "I'll be rid of it tonight -- then I'll do the
   brochure, okay?"

   Just as I hung up Schwartz motioned me over to the desk. "Big wreck on
   Bayamon Road," he said, handing me a page of scribbled notes. "Sala's not
   around -- can you handle a camera?"

   "Sure," I said. "I'll get a few Nikons from the darkroom."

   "Good thinking," he said. "Take them all."

   I raced out Bayamon Road until I saw the flashing red lights of a parked
   ambulance. I got there just in time to get a shot of one of the bodies,
   lying in the dust beside an overturned farm truck. For some reason that
   nobody understood, it had swerved out of its lane and slammed head-on into
   a bus. I asked a few questions, talked awhile with the cops, then hurried
   back to the office to write the story. I typed feverishly so I could
   finish the damn thing and get out to. . .

   Suddenly I realized I was not going to Yeamon's. I was hurrying because I
   was anxious to get back to the apartment. I'd been anxious all day, and
   now, as the afternoon came to an end, I groaned inwardly as the truth
   slithered out in the open and stared me in the face.

   I turned the story in and went down the stairs to my car, thinking I
   should probably check by Al's to see if he might be there. But the thing
   that drew me toward the apartment was huge and powerful. I started up
   toward Al's, then suddenly turned off toward Condado and tried not to
   think about anything until I pulled up in front of my apartment.

   She was wearing one of my shirts and it hung on her like a short nightie.
   She smiled happily when I came in and got up off the bed to make me a
   drink. The shirt flapped lewdly around her thighs as she bounced into the
   kitchen.

   I felt totally defeated. For a while I paced around the apartment, barely
   hearing her happy chatter, then I gave up entirely and went over to the
   bed and took off my clothes. I fell on her with such a violence that her
   smile quickly disappeared and it became a desperate business. She kicked
   her feet in the air and shrieked and arched her back and she was still
   trying when I exploded inside her and collapsed with total exhaustion.
   Finally she gave up and locked her legs around my hips and her arms around
   my neck, and started to cry.

   I leaned on my elbows and looked down at her. "What's wrong?" I asked.

   She kept her eyes closed and shook her head. "I can't," she sobbed. "I get
   so close, but I can't."

   I looked at her for a moment, wondering what I should say, then I put my
   head down on the bed and moaned. We stayed that way for a long time, and
   finally we got up and she cooked dinner while I read the Miami Herald.

   The next morning I drove out to Yeamon's. I didn't know exactly what I was
   going to say to him, so I kept thinking about his bad points so I could
   lie without feeling guilty. But it was hard to see a bastard at the end of
   that drive. The hot, peaceful beauty of the ocean and the sand and the
   green-gold palms threw me completely off balance, and by the time I got to
   his house I felt like a decadent intruder.

   He was sitting naked on the patio, drinking coffee and reading a book. I
   pulled up beside the house and got out. He turned and smiled. "What's the
   score?"

   "Chenault's back," I said. "I have her at the apartment."

   "When?" he said.

   "Yesterday -- I meant to bring her out here last night, but I thought I'd
   check with you first."

   "What happened?" he asked. "Did she tell you?"

   "Just fragments," I said. "It didn't sound good."

   He kept staring at me. "Well, what's she going to do?"

   "I don't know," I said, feeling more and more nervous. "You want me to
   bring her out here?"

   He looked out to sea for an instant, then back at me. "Hell no," he
   snapped. "She's yours -- with my compliments."

   "Don't give me that," I said. "She just showed up at my apartment -- she
   was in pretty bad shape."

   "Who gives a damn?" he said.

   "Well," I said slowly, "she wants me to get her clothes."

   "Sure," he said, getting out of the chair. He went into the hut and began
   throwing things out the door. They were mostly clothes, but some of them
   were mirrors and little boxes and glass objects that broke on the patio.

   I went to the door. "Take it easy!" I yelled. "What the hell is wrong with
   you?"

   He came out with a suitcase and threw it toward the car. "Get the hell out
   of here!" he shouted. "You and that whore make a good pair!"

   The clothes were all in a heap and I loaded them into the back of my car
   while he watched. When I got it all packed in I opened the door and sat
   down. "Call me at the paper," I said. "But wait till you calm down. I have
   enough trouble as it is."

   He glared at me and I quickly backed the car out to the road. It had been
   just about as bad as I'd thought it was going to be, and I wanted to get
   away before it got any worse. I pushed the accelerator to the floor and
   the little car bounced over the ruts like a jeep, throwing up a huge trail
   of dust. It was almost noon and the sun was glaring hot. The sea rolled in
   on the dunes and the swamp sent up a steamy mist that burned my eyes and
   blotted out the sun. I drove past the Colmado de Jesus Lopo and saw the
   old man leaning on his counter and staring out at me as if he knew the
   whole story, and was not at all surprised.

   When I got back to the apartment Chenault was washing the dishes. She
   looked over her shoulder and smiled as I came in. "You're back," she said.
   "I wasn't sure you'd make it."

   "He wasn't happy," I said, dumping a load of her clothes on the bed.

   She laughed, but it was a sad sound and it made me feel even worse. "Poor
   Fritz," she said. "He'll never grow up."

   "Yeah," I said. Then I went back down to the car for more clothes.

   Eighteen

   On my way to work the next morning I stopped by Al's and found Sala on the
   patio. He was drinking a beer and thumbing through a new issue of Life en
   Espanol. I got a jar of iced rum from the kitchen and went out to his
   table.

   "Are they in there?" I asked, nodding at the magazine.

   "Hell no," he grumbled. "They'll never use 'em -- Sanderson told me they
   were scheduled last fall."

   "What the hell?" I said. "You got paid."

   He tossed the magazine aside and leaned back in the chair. "That's only
   half of it," he said. "I can get paid anytime."

   We sat for a while in silence, then he looked up. "Ah, this is a shitty
   place, Kemp -- the shittiest place I've ever seen." He reached into his
   shirt pocket for a cigarette. "Yep, I think the time has come for old
   Robert to put his ass on the road." I smiled.

   "No, it won't be long now," he said. "Lotterman gets back today and I
   won't be surprised if he folds the paper by midnight" He nodded. "The
   minute they hand out those checks I'm going to run like hell for the bank
   and get mine cashed."

   "I don't know," I said. "Schwartz said he got some money."

   He shook his head. "Poor Schwartz, he'll still be showing up for work when
   they turn the place into a bowling alley." He chuckled. "What else? El
   Headline Bowling Palace, with Moberg tending the bar. Maybe they'll hire
   Schwartz to do publicity." He shouted toward the kitchen for two beers,
   then looked at me. I nodded. "Four," he yelled. "And turn on the goddamn
   air conditioning."

   He fell back in the chair again. "I have to get off this rock. I know some
   people in Mexico City -- I may give it a try." He grinned. "I know they
   have women there, anyway."

   "Hell," I said. "Plenty of women around if you'd get off your ass."

   He looked up. "Kemp, I believe you're a whorehopper."

   I laughed. "Why?"

   "Why!" he exclaimed. "I'm onto your sneaky ways, Kemp. I suspected it all
   along -- and now you've lured that girl away from Yeamon."

   "What?" I exclaimed.

   "Don't deny it," he said. "He was in here earlier -- told me the whole
   sleazy story."

   "You bastard!" I said. "Chenault just showed up at my apartment. She
   didn't have anywhere else to go."

   He grinned. "She could have moved in with me -- at least I'm decent."

   I snorted. "Christ, you'd have finished her off!"

   "I suppose you're sleeping on the floor," he replied. "I know that
   apartment, Kemp. I know there's only one bed. Don't give me this Christian
   crap."

   "Christian hell!" I said. "You're such a sex-crazy sonofabitch that
   there's no sense telling you anything."

   He laughed. "Calm down, Kemp, you're getting hysterical -- I know you
   wouldn't touch the girl, you're not that way." He laughed again and
   ordered four more beers.

   "Just for the record," I said, "I'm sending her back to New York."

   "Probably the best thing," he replied. "Any girl that runs off with a pack
   of bushmen is bad news."

   "I told you what happened over there," I said. "She didn't run off with
   anybody."

   He shook his head. "Forget it," he said wearily. "I couldn't care less. Do
   whatever you want. I have my own problems."

   The beers arrived and I glanced down at my watch. "It's almost noon," I
   said. "You don't figure on going to work?"

   "I'll go when I'm drunk enough," he replied. "Have another beer -- we'll
   all be gone by Monday."

   We drank steadily for three hours, then we drove down to the office.
   Lotterman was back, but he'd gone out somewhere. He finally came in about
   five and called us all together in the middle of the room. Then he climbed
   up on a desk.

   "Men," he said. "You'll be happy to know that that goddamn worthless
   Segarra finally quit. He was the worst goldbricker we've ever had in this
   place and on top of that he was queer -- now that he's gone I think we'll
   be all right."

   There were a few snickers, then silence.

   "That's only part of the good news," he said with a big smile. "I suppose
   you all know the paper hasn't been making much money lately -- well by God
   we don't have to worry about that anymore!" He paused and looked around.
   "You've all heard of Daniel Stein, I guess -- well he's an old friend of
   mine, and as of Monday morning he's half-owner of this newspaper." He
   smiled. "I walked into his office and I said, 'Dan, I want to keep my
   paper alive,' and he said, 'Ed, how much do you need?' That's all there
   was to it His lawyers are fixing up the papers and they'll be here on
   Monday for me to sign." He shifted nervously on the desk and smiled again.
   "Now I know you boys were expecting to get paid today, and I hate to cramp
   your style for the weekend, but under my agreement with Dan I can't give
   out any paychecks until I sign those papers -- so you won't get paid until
   Monday." He nodded quickly. "Of course anybody who needs a few bucks to
   get by until then can hit me up for a loan -- I don't want you boys
   getting thirsty and blaming it on me." There was a ripple of laughter,
   then I heard Sala's voice from somewhere on the other side of the room. "I
   know about this guy, Stein," he said. "Are you sure he'll come through?"

   Lotterman banished the question with a wave of his hand. "Of course I'm
   sure, Bob. Dan and I are old friends."

   "Well," Sala replied. "I have a pretty big weekend coming up, and if it's
   all the same to you I'd just as soon borrow my whole pay-check right now,
   then you won't have to give me anything on Monday."

   Lotterman stared down at him. "What are you trying to say, Bob?"

   "I don't talk in swirls," Sala replied. "I just want you to lend me a
   hundred and twenty-five bucks until Monday."

   "That's ridiculous!" Lotterman shouted.

   "Ridiculous, hell," said Sala. "I worked in Miami, remember? I know Stein.
   He's a convicted embezzler." He lit a cigarette. "And besides, I might not
   be here on Monday."

   "What do you mean?" Lotterman shouted. "You're not quitting?"

   "I didn't say that," Sala replied.

   "Now listen, Bob!" Lotterman shouted. "I don't know what you're trying to
   do here, telling me you might quit and you might not -- who in hell do you
   think you are?"

   Sala smiled faintly. "Don't shout, Ed. It makes us all nervous. I just
   asked for a loan, that's all."

   Lotterman jumped down off the desk. "You can see me in my office," he said
   over his shoulder. "Kemp, I want to see you next." He waved his hand in
   the air. "That's all boys, let's get back to work."

   Sala followed him into his office. I stood there and heard Schwartz
   saying: "This is a terrible thing -- I don't know what to believe."

   "The worst," I replied.

   Moberg came running over to us. "He can't do this!" he screamed. "No
   salary, no severance pay -- we can't stand it!"

   Lotterman's door opened and Sala came out looking very unhappy. Lotterman
   appeared right behind him and called to me. He waited until I got inside,
   then closed the door behind us.

   "Paul," he said. "What can I do with these guys?"

   I looked at him, not sure what he meant.

   "I'm on the ropes," he said. "You're the only one here I can talk to --
   the others are vultures."

   "Why me?" I said. "I'm a hell of a vulture."

   "No you're not," he said quickly. "You're lazy, but you're not a vulture
   -- not like that stinking Sala!" He sputtered angrily. "Did you hear that
   crap he was giving me? Have you ever heard anything like it?"

   I shrugged. "Well --"

   "That's why I want to talk to you," he said. "I have to handle these guys.
   We're in real trouble -- this guy Stein has me pinned to the wall." He
   looked up at me and nodded. "If I can't get this paper going, he'll close
   it and sell it for junk. I'll go to debtor's prison."

   "Sounds pretty bleak," I said.

   He laughed humorlessly. "You don't know the half of it!" Then his voice
   became hearty and full of purpose. "Now what I want you to do is get these
   guys on the ball. I want you to tell 'em that we all have to pull
   together, or we'll sink!"

   "Sink?" I said.

   He nodded emphatically. "You're damn tootin'."

   "Well," I said slowly. "That's sort of a hairy proposition, what do you
   figure Sala would say if I went out there and told him it was sink or swim
   with the Daily News?" I hesitated. "Or Schwartz, or Vanderwitz -- even
   Moberg."

   He stared down at his desk. "Yeah," he said finally. "I guess they can all
   run -- like Segarra." He slammed his fist on the desk. "That greasy little
   pervert! He didn't just quit -- he broadcast it all over San Juan! People
   kept telling me they'd heard the paper was bankrupt. That's why I had to
   go to Miami -- I can't borrow a dime in this town. That mealy-mouthed
   lizard is out there screwing me."

   I was tempted to ask him why he'd hired Segarra in the first place, or why
   he had put out a fifth-rate paper when he might have at least tried to put
   out a good one. Suddenly I was tired of Lotterman; he was a phony and he
   didn't even know it. He was forever yapping about Freedom of the Press and
   Keeping the Paper Going, but if he'd had a million dollars and all the
   freedom in the world he'd still put out a worthless newspaper because he
   wasn't smart enough to put out a good one. He was just another noisy
   little punk in the great legion of punks who march between the banners of
   bigger and better men. Freedom, Truth, Honor -- you could rattle off a
   hundred such words and behind every one of them would gather a thousand
   punks, pompous little farts, waving the banner with one hand and reaching
   under the table with the other.

   I stood up. "Ed," I said, using his name for the first time, "I believe
   I'll quit."

   He looked up at me, his face blank.

   "Yeah," I said. "I'll be back on Monday for my check, and after that I
   think I'll rest awhile."

   He jumped out of his seat and rushed at me. "You cheap Ivy League
   sonofabitch!" he shouted. "I've tolerated your arrogance long enough!" He
   pushed me toward the door. "You're fired!" he screamed. "Get out of the
   building before I have you locked up!" He gave me a shove into the
   newsroom, then went back in his office and slammed the door.

   I wandered over to my desk and started laughing when Sala asked me what
   happened. "He went off his nut," I replied. "I told him I was quitting and
   he snapped."

   "Well," said Sala, "it's all over anyway. He promised me a month's salary
   if I'd tell people that he fired Segarra because he was queer -- said he'd
   pay it out of his own pocket if Stein didn't come through."

   "The cheap bastard," I said. "He didn't offer me a dime." I laughed. "Of
   course he talked like he was ready to give me Segarra's job -- until
   Monday."

   "Yeah, Monday's D-Day," said Sala. "He'll have to pay us if he wants to
   put out a paper." He shook his head. "But I don't think he does -- I think
   he sold out to Stein."

   He snorted. "So what? If he can't pay the staff, he's finished, no matter
   what he wants. I know one damn thing -- he'll be running the greyest paper
   in the Western Hemisphere if I don't get my check on Monday. I'm coming in
   here tomorrow morning and clean out the whole photo library -- about 99
   percent of that stuff is mine."

   "Hell yes," I said. "Hold it for ransom." Then I grinned. "Of course
   they'd get you for grand larceny if he pressed it -- he might even
   remember about your thousand-dollar bail."

   He shook his head. "Jesus, I keep forgetting about that -- you think he
   really paid it?"

   "I don't know," I said. "Probably a pretty good chance he got it back, but
   I'd hate to count on it."

   "Ah, to hell with it," he replied. "Let's go up to Al's."

   It was a hot, muggy night and I felt like getting drunk as a loon.

   We had been there about an hour, swilling rum at top speed, when Donovan
   came roaring in. He had been out at the golf tournament all afternoon and
   had just heard the news. "Holy mother of jack-bastards!" he yelled. "I
   went back to the paper and there was nobody there but Schwartz, working
   his ass off!" He fell down in a chair. "What happened -- are we done in?"

   "Yes," I said. "You're finished."

   He nodded gravely. "I still have a deadline," he said. "I must finish my
   sports section." He started for the street. "I'll be back in an hour," he
   assured us. "All I have to do is this golf story. To hell with the rest of
   it -- I'll run a full-page cartoon."

   Sala and I kept drinking, and when Donovan came back we stepped up the
   pace. By midnight we were all pretty wild and I began thinking about
   Chenault. I thought about it for another hour or so, and then I got up and
   said I was going home.

   On the way back, I stopped in Condado and got a bottle of rum. When I got
   to the apartment she was sitting on the bed, reading Heart of Darkness and
   still wearing the same shirt

   I slammed the door behind me and went to the kitchen to mix a drink. "Wake
   up and ponder the future," I said over my shoulder. "I quit tonight and
   got fired about two minutes later."

   She looked up and smiled. "No more money?"

   "No more nothing," I replied, filling two glasses with rum. "I'm clearing
   out. I'm tired of it."

   "Tired of what?" she asked.

   I took one of the drinks over to the bed. "Here," I said. "Here's one of
   the things I'm tired of." I shoved it into her hand, then walked over to
   the window and looked down at the street. "Mainly," I said, "I'm tired of
   being a punk -- a human suckfish." I chuckled. "You know about suckfish?"
   She shook her head.

   "They have little suction cups on their bellies," I said. "And they attach
   themselves to sharks -- when the shark gets a big meal, the suckfish eats
   the leftovers."

   She giggled and sipped her drink.

   "Don't laugh," I snapped. "You're Exhibit A -- first Yeamon, then me." It
   was an ugly thing to say, but I was raving now and I didn't care. "Hell,"
   I added. "I'm no better. If somebody came up to me and said, 'Tell me,
   Mister Kemp, just what is your profession?' I'd say, 'Well, you see, I
   swim around in murky waters until I find something big and bad to clamp
   onto -- a good provider, as it were, something with big teeth and a small
   belly.'" I laughed at her. "That's the combination a good suckflsh looks
   for -- avoid the big belly at all costs."

   She looked at me, shaking her head sadly.

   "That's right!" I shouted. "I'm drunk and nuts both -- no hope for me, is
   there?" I stopped pacing and looked at her. "Well there's not much hope
   for you either, by God. You're so damn stupid that you don't know a
   suckflsh when you see one!" I started pacing again. "You said to hell with
   the only person down here without cups on his belly, and then you grab on
   to me, of all damn people." I shook my head. "Christ, I'm cups all over --
   I've been grabbing leftovers so long I don't know what the real thing
   looks like anymore."

   She was crying now, but I kept on. "What the hell are you going to do,
   Chenault? What can you do?" I went back to the kitchen for more drink.
   "You better start thinking," I said. "Your days are numbered here --
   unless you want to pay the rent when I go."

   She kept on crying, and I walked back to the window. "No hope for an old
   suckflsh," I muttered, suddenly feeling very tired. I wandered around for
   a while, saying nothing, then I went over and sat down on the bed.

   She stopped crying and sat up, leaning on one elbow. "When are you
   leaving?" she said.

   "I don't know," I replied. "Probably next week."

   "Where?" she asked.

   "I don't know -- someplace new."

   She was silent for a moment, then she said, "Well, I suppose I'll go back
   to New York."

   I shrugged. "I'll get you a plane ticket. I can't afford it, but what the
   hell."

   "You don't have to," she said. "I have money."

   I stared at her. "I thought you couldn't even get back from St Thomas."

   "I didn't have any then," she said. "It was in that suitcase you got from
   Fritz -- I hid it, so we'd have something left." She smiled faintly. "It's
   only a hundred dollars."

   "Hell," I said. "You'll need some when you get to New York."

   "No I won't," she replied. "I'll still have fifty, and --" she hesitated.
   "And I think I'll go home for a while. My parents live in Connecticut."

   "Well," I said. "That's good, I guess."

   She leaned over and put her head on my chest "It's horrible," she sobbed.
   "But I don't know where else to go."

   I put my arm around her shoulders. I didn't know where she could go,
   either, or why, or what she could do when she got there.

   "Can I stay here until you go?" she asked.

   I tightened my arm on her shoulders, pulling her closer. "Sure," I said.
   "If you think you can stand the gaff."

   "The what?" she asked.

   I smiled and stood up. "The craziness," I said. "Do you mind if I get
   naked and drunk?"

   She giggled. "What about me?"

   "Sure," I said, taking off my clothes. "Why not?"

   I made some new drinks and brought the bottle back to the table beside the
   bed. Then I turned on the fan and put out the lights while we sipped our
   drinks. I was propped up on pillows and she had her head on my chest The
   silence was so total that the clink of the ice in my glass sounded loud
   enough to be heard on the street. The moon was bright through the front
   window and I watched the expression on Chenault's face, wondering how she
   could look so peaceful and content.

   After a while I reached over and filled my glass again. In the process, I
   spilled some rum on my stomach and she leaned down to lick it off. The
   touch of her tongue made me shudder, and after a moment of contemplation I
   picked up the bottle again and spilled some rum on my leg. She looked up
   at me and smiled, as if I were playing some kind of an odd joke, then she
   bent down and carefully licked it off.

   Nineteen

   We woke up early the next morning. I drove down to the hotel to get some
   papers while Chenault took a shower. I got a Times and a Trib, so we'd
   both have something to read, and then as an afterthought I bought two
   copies of what I figured was the final issue of the San Juan Daily News. I
   wanted to have one as a souvenir.

   We had breakfast at the table by the window and afterward we drank coffee
   and read the papers. That morning was the only time I ever felt a sense of
   peace in the apartment, and when I thought about it I felt dumb, because
   that was the only reason I'd wanted it in the first place. I lay on the
   bed and smoked and listened to the radio while Chenault washed the dishes.
   There was a good breeze, and when I looked out the window I could see
   across the trees and the red-tiled rooftops all the way to the horizon.

   Chenault was wearing my shirt again, and I watched it bounce and flutter
   around her thighs as she moved in the kitchen. After a while I got up and
   crept over to her, lifting the shirt and seizing her rump with both hands.
   She shrieked and spun around, then fell against me, laughing. I put my
   arms around her and playfully jerked the tail of the shirt up over her
   head. We stood there swaying slightly and then I carried her over to the
   bed, where we made love very quietly.

   It was mid-morning when I left the house, but the sun was already so hot
   that it felt like mid-afternoon. Driving along the beach I remembered how
   much I'd enjoyed the mornings when I first came to San Juan. There is
   something fresh and crisp about the first hours of a Caribbean day, a
   happy anticipation that something is about to happen, maybe just up the
   street or around the next corner. Whenever I look back on those months and
   try to separate the good times from the bad, I recall those mornings when
   I had an early assignment -- when I would borrow Sala's car and go roaring
   along the big tree-lined boulevard. I remember the feel of the little car
   vibrating beneath me and the sudden heat of the sun on my face as I zipped
   out of the shade and into a patch of light; I remember the whiteness of my
   shirt and the sound of a silk tie flapping in the wind beside my head, the
   unhinged feel of the accelerator and a sudden switching of lanes to pass a
   truck and beat a red light.

   Then into a palm-lined driveway and hit the rasping brakes, flip down the
   Press tag on the visor and leave the car in the nearest No Parking zone.
   Hurry into the lobby, pulling on the coat to my new black suit and
   dangling a camera in one hand while an oily clerk calls my man to confirm
   the appointment. Then up a soft elevator to the suite -- big greeting,
   pompous conversation, and black coffee from a silver pot, a few quick
   photos on the balcony, grinning handshake, then back down the elevator and
   hustle off.

   On my way back to the office, with a pocketful of notes, I would stop at
   one of the outdoor restaurants on the beach for a club sandwich and a
   beer; sitting in the shade to read the papers and ponder the madness of
   the news, or leaning back with a lusty grin at all the bright-wrapped
   nipples, trying to decide how many I could get my hands on before the week
   was out.

   Those were the good mornings, when the sun was hot and the air was quick
   and promising, when the Real Business seemed right on the verge of
   happening and I felt that if I went just a little faster I might overtake
   that bright and fleeting thing that was always just ahead.

   Then came noon, and morning withered like a lost dream. The sweat was
   torture and the rest of the day was littered with the dead remains of all
   those things that might have happened, but couldn't stand the heat. When
   the sun got hot enough it burned away all the illusions and I saw the
   place as it was -- cheap, sullen, and garish -- nothing good was going to
   happen here.

   Sometimes at dusk, when you were trying to relax and not think about the
   general stagnation, the Garbage God would gather a handful of those
   choked-off morning hopes and dangle them somewhere just out of reach; they
   would hang in the breeze and make a sound like delicate glass bells,
   reminding you of something you never quite got hold of, and never would.
   It was a maddening image, and the only way to whip it was to hang on until
   dusk and banish the ghosts with rum. Often it was easier not to wait, so
   the drinking would begin at noon. It didn't help much, as I recall, except
   that sometimes it made the day go a little faster.

   I was snapped out of my reverie when I turned the corner into Calle
   O'Leary and saw Sala's car parked in front of Al's front door, and next to
   it was Yeamon's scooter. The day turned instantly rotten and a sort of
   panic came on me. I drove past Al's without stopping, and kept looking
   straight ahead until I turned down the hill. I drove around for a while,
   trying to think it out, but no matter how many reasonable conclusions I
   came to, I still felt like a snake. Not that I didn't feel perfectly right
   and justified -- I just couldn't bring myself to go up there and sit down
   at a table across from Yeamon. The more I thought about it, the worse I
   felt. Hang out a shingle, I muttered: "P. Kemp, Drunken Journalist,
   Suckfish & Snake -- hrs. noon to dawn, closed Mondays."

   As I circled the Plaza Colon I got jammed up behind a fruit peddler and
   blew my horn savagely at him. "You stinking little nazi!" I shouted. "Get
   out of my way."

   My mood was turning sour. My sense of humor was slipping. It was time to
   get off the street.

   I headed for the Condado Beach Club, where I hunkered down at a big glass
   table on the deck with a red, blue, and yellow umbrella to keep off the
   sun. I spent the next few hours reading The Nigger of the Narcissus and
   making notes for my story on The Rise and Fall of the San Juan Daily News.
   I was feeling smart, but reading Conrad's preface frightened me so much
   that I abandoned all hope of ever being anything but a failure. . .

   But not today, I thought. Today will be different. Today we will whoop it
   up. Have a picnic. Get some champagne. Take Chenault out to the beach and
   go wild. My mood swung immediately. I called the waiter and ordered two
   special picnic lunches with lobster and mangoes.

   When I got back to the apartment, Chenault was gone. There was no sign of
   her, none of her clothes in the closet. There was an eerie sense of quiet
   in the place, a strange emptiness.

   Then I saw the note in my typewriter -- four or five lines on Daily News
   stationery with a vivid pink lipstick kiss above my name.

   Dear Paul,

   I can't stand it anymore. My plane leaves at six. You love me. We are
   soul-mates. We will drink rum and dance naked. Come see me in New York. I
   will have a few surprises for you.

   Love,

   Chenault

   I looked at my watch and saw that it was six-fifteen. Too late to catch
   her at the airport. Ah well, I thought I'll see her in New York.

   I sat on the bed and drank the bottle of champagne. I felt melancholy, so
   I decided to go swimming. I drove out to Luisa Aldea where the beach was
   empty.

   The surf was high and I felt a combination of fear and eagerness as I took
   off my clothes and walked toward it. In the backlash of a huge wave I
   plunged in and let it suck me out to sea. Moments later I was hurtling
   back toward the beach on top of a long white breaker that carried me along
   like a torpedo. Then it spun me around like a dead fish and slammed me on
   the sand so hard that my back was raw for days afterward.

   I kept at it as long as I could stand up, riding out with the riptide and
   waiting for the next big one to throw me back at the beach.

   It was getting dark when I quit and the bugs were coming out, millions of
   diseased little gnats, impossible to see. I felt a thick black taste in my
   mouth as I stumbled toward my car.

   Twenty

   Monday was a crucial day and the tension was waiting for me when I woke
   up. I had overslept again and it was almost noon. After a quick breakfast,
   I hurried down to the paper.

   When I got there I found Moberg on the front steps, reading a notice
   tacked to the door. It was long and complicated, saying in essence that
   the paper had been sold into receivership and all claims against the
   former owners would be duly considered by Stein Enterprises of Miami,
   Florida.

   Moberg finished reading it and turned to me. "This is unconscionable," he
   said. "We should break in and loot the place. I need money, all I have is
   ten dollars." Then, before I could stop him, he kicked the glass out of
   the door. "Come on," he said, starting through the hole. "I know where he
   keeps the petty cash."

   Suddenly, a bell began ringing and I jerked him backward. "You crazy
   bastard," I said. "You've triggered the alarm. We have to get away from
   this place before the cops get here."

   We raced up to Al's and found the others huddled around a big patio table
   and jabbering feverishly. Drizzling rain forced them to hunch closely as
   they plotted the murder of Lotterman.

   "That swine," said Moberg. "He could have paid us Friday. He has plenty of
   money, I've seen it."

   Sala laughed. "Hitler had plenty of money, but he never paid his bills."

   Schwartz shook his head sadly. "I wish I could get into the office. I have
   to make some calls." He nodded meaningfully. "Long calls -- like Paris,
   Kenya, and Tokyo."

   "Why Tokyo?" said Moberg. "You can get killed there."

   "You mean you can get killed there," Schwartz replied. "I mind my own
   business."

   Moberg shook his head. "I have friends in Tokyo. You'll never make friends
   -- you're too stupid."

   "You dirty little lush!" Schwartz exclaimed, suddenly standing up. "One
   more word out of you and I'll punch your face!"

   Moberg laughed easily. "You're cracking up, Schwartz. I'd advise you to
   take a bath."

   Schwartz took a quick step around the table and swung like he was throwing
   a baseball. Moberg could have dodged, if he'd had any reflexes, but he
   just sat there and let himself be bashed off his chair.

   It was a tough show and Schwartz was obviously pleased with himself.
   "That'll teach you," he muttered, starting for the door. "See you fellows
   later," he called back to us. "I can't stand being around that lush."

   Moberg grinned and spit at him. "I'll be back in a while," he told us. "I
   have to see a woman in Rio Piedras -- I need money."

   Sala watched him go, shaking his head sadly. "I've seen a lot of creeps in
   my time, but that one takes the cake."

   "Nonsense," I said. "Moberg is your friend. Never forget that."

   Later that night we went to a garden party given by the Rum League and the
   San Juan Chamber of Commerce, to honor the spirit of American scholarship.
   The house was white stucco, ornate and sprawling, with a big garden in
   back. About a hundred people were there, most of them dressed formally. On
   one side of the garden was a long bar and I hurried toward it Donovan was
   there, drinking heavily. He opened his coat discreetly and showed me a
   butcher knife tucked into his belt "Look at this," he said. "We're ready."

   Ready? I thought. Ready for what? Slitting Lotterman's throat? The garden
   was full of rich celebrities and visiting students. I noticed Yeamon
   standing off from the crowd with his arm around an exceptionally pretty
   girl. They were sharing a pint of gin and laughing harshly. Yeamon was
   wearing black nylon gloves, which I took as an ominous sign. Jesus, I
   thought, these bastards have gone through the looking glass. I wanted no
   part of it

   The party was dressy. There was a band on the porch, playing "Cielito
   Lindo" over and over again. They gave it a mad waltzing tempo and each
   time they finished, the dancers would yell for more. For some reason, I
   remember that moment as well or better than anything else I saw in Puerto
   Rico. A sensuous green garden, surrounded by palms and a brick wall; a
   long bar full of bottles and ice, and behind it a white-coated bartender;
   an elderly crowd in dinner jackets and bright dresses, talking peacefully
   on the lawn. A warm Caribbean night, with time passing slowly and at a
   respectful distance.

   I felt a hand on my arm and it was Sala. "Lotterman's here," he said.
   "We're going to nail him."

   Just then we heard a shrill scream. I looked across the garden and saw a
   flurry of movement There was another scream and I recognized Moberg's
   voice, yelling: "Watch out, watch out. . . eeeeeeyahhaaaa!"

   I got there just in time to see him getting up off the ground. Lotterman
   was standing over him, waving his fist. "You stinking little sot! You
   tried to kill me!"

   Moberg got up slowly and brushed himself off. "You deserve to die," he
   snarled, "die like the rat you are."

   Lotterman was trembling and his face was dark red. He took a quick step
   toward Moberg and hit him again, knocking him back on some people who were
   trying to get out of the way. I heard laughter beside me and a voice
   saying, "One of Ed's boys tried to hit him up for some cash. Look at him
   go, would you!"

   Lotterman was shouting incoherently and flailing at Moberg, driving him
   back into the crowd. Moberg was screaming for help when he bumped into
   Yeamon coming the other way. Yeamon shoved him aside and yelled something
   at Lotterman. The only word I caught was "Now. . ."

   I saw Lotterman's face collapse with surprise, and he was standing
   straight as a wooden pole when Yeamon hit him in the eyes and knocked him
   about six feet. He staggered wildly for a moment, then collapsed on the
   grass, bleeding from his eyes and both ears. Then, out of the corner of my
   eye, I saw a dark shape come hurtling across the garden and strike the
   group like a cannonball. They all went down, but Donovan was first on his
   feet. He had a berserk grin on his face as he grabbed one man by the head
   and mashed him sideways against a tree. Yeamon dragged Lotterman out from
   under another man and began whacking him around the garden like a punching
   bag.

   The crowd panicked and rushed to escape. "Call the police!" one man
   shouted.

   A wrinkled old woman in a strapless dress went stumbling past me,
   shrieking, "Take me home! Take me home! I'm afraid!"

   I edged away through the mob, trying to attract as little attention as
   possible. When I got to the door I looked back and saw a bunch of men
   staring down at Lotterman's body and making the sign of the cross. "There
   they go!" someone shouted, and I looked toward the back of the garden
   where he was pointing. There was a rustling in the bushes, the sound of
   snapping limbs, and then I saw Donovan and Yeamon scrambling over the
   wall.

   A man came running up the steps to the house. "They got away!" he shouted.
   "Somebody call the police! I'm going after them!"

   I slid out the door and ran along the sidewalk toward my car. I thought I
   heard Yeamon's scooter somewhere nearby, but I couldn't be sure. I decided
   to hurry back to Al's, saying that I'd ducked out of that unruly crowd and
   gone down to the Flamboyan for a few quiet beers. It would be a flimsy
   alibi, if anybody at the party had recognized me, but I had no choice.

   I'd been there about fifteen minutes when Sala arrived. He was trembling
   as he hurried over to the table. "Man!" he said in a loud whisper. "I've
   been driving like a bastard all over town. I didn't know where to go." He
   looked around to make sure there was nobody else in the patio.

   I laughed and leaned back in the chair. "Wasn't that a bitch?"

   "A bitch?" he exclaimed. "Did you hear what happened? Lotterman had a
   heart attack -- he's dead."

   I leaned toward him. "Where'd you hear that?"

   "I was there when they took him away in the ambulance," he replied. "You
   should have seen the place -- women screaming, cops everywhere -- they
   took Moberg." He lit a cigarette. "You know we're still out on bail," he
   said quietly. "We're doomed."

   The lights were on in my apartment, and as I hurried up the stairs I heard
   the shower running. The bathroom door was closed and I pulled it open. The
   curtain jerked back and Yeamon peered out of the shower. "Kemp?" he said,
   peering through the steam. "Who the hell is it?"

   "God damn you!" I shouted. "How did you get in here?"

   "Your window was open. I'll have to stay here tonight -- the lights failed
   on my scooter."

   "You dumb bastard!" I snapped. "You might have a murder rap on your ass --
   Lotterman had a heart attack -- he's dead!"

   He jumped out of the shower and wrapped a towel around his waist. "Jesus,"
   he said. "I better get out of here."

   "Where's Donovan?" I said. "They're after him too."

   He shook his head. "I don't know. We hit a parked car on the scooter. He
   said he was going to the airport."

   I looked at my watch. It was almost eleven-thirty. "Where's the scooter?"
   I asked.

   He pointed to the rear of the building. "I put it around the side. It was
   hell getting here with no lights."

   I groaned. "Christ, you're sucking me right into jail! Get dressed. You're
   leaving."

   It was a ten-minute drive to the airport and we had barely got under way
   when we ran into a tropical monsoon. We stopped and put up the top, but by
   the time we got it snapped down we were both soaking wet.

   The rain was blinding. A few inches above my head it pounded on the
   canvas, and beneath us the tires hissed on the wet pavement.

   We swung off the highway and started up the long road to the airport We
   were about halfway to the terminal when I looked to my left and saw a big
   plane with Pan Am markings come hurtling down the runway. I thought I
   could see Donovan's face at one of the windows, grinning and waving at us
   as the plane lifted off the runway and went past us with a great roar, a
   winged monster full of lights and people, all bound for New York. I pulled
   over and we watched it climb and go into a steep turn above the palm
   jungle and then out to sea, until finally it was nothing but a tiny red
   dot up in the stars.

   "Well," I said. "There it goes."

   Yeamon stared after it. "Is that the last one?"

   "Yep," I replied. "Next flight's at nine-thirty tomorrow morning."

   After a pause he said, "Well, I guess we should head back."

   I looked at him. "Back where?" I said. "You might as well give yourself up
   right now as come out here tomorrow morning."

   He stared out at the rain and glanced around nervously. "Well goddamnit, I
   have to get off this island -- that's all there is to it."

   I thought for a moment, then I remembered the ferry from Fajardo to St.
   Thomas. As far as I knew, it left about eight every morning. We decided
   that he would go over there and get a cheap room at the Grand Hotel. After
   that he would be on his own --I had my own problems.

   It was forty miles to Fajardo, but the road was good and there was no
   hurry, so I drove easily. The rain had stopped and the night smelled
   fresh. We put the top down and took turns sipping the rum.

   "Damn," he said after a while. "I hate to have to take off for South
   America with one suit and a hundred dollars to my name."

   He leaned back in the seat and wept I could hear the surf a few hundred
   yards to the left of the road. To the right I could see the peak of El
   Yunque, a black outline against a menacing sky.

   It was almost one-thirty when we came to the end of the highway and turned
   off to Fajardo. The town was dark and there wasn't a soul on the streets.
   We rounded the empty plaza and drove down toward the ferry dock. There was
   a small hotel about a block away and I stopped in front of it while he
   went in to get a room.

   In a few minutes he came out and got into the car. "Well," he said
   quietly, "I'm okay. The ferry leaves at eight."

   He seemed to want to sit for a while, so I lit another cigarette and tried
   to relax. The town was so quiet that every sound we made seemed
   dangerously amplified. Once the rum bottle banged against the steering
   wheel as he was passing it back to me, and I jumped like somebody had
   fired a shot.

   He laughed quietly. "Take it easy, Kemp. You don't have anything to worry
   about."

   I wasn't so much worried, as spooked. There was something eerie about the
   whole business, as if God in a fit of disgust had decided to wipe us all
   out. Our structure was collapsing; it seemed like just a few hours ago
   that I was having breakfast with Chenault in the sunny peace of my own
   home. Then I had ventured into the day, and plunged headlong into an orgy
   of murder and shrieking and breaking of glass. Now it was ending just as
   senselessly as it began. It was all over and I was very sure of it because
   Yeamon was leaving. There might be some noise after he left, but it would
   be orthodox noise, the kind a man can deal with and even ignore --instead
   of those sudden unnerving eruptions that suck you into them and toss you
   around like a toad in rough water.

   I couldn't remember where it actually began, but it was ending here in
   Fajardo, a dark little spot on the map that seemed to be the end of the
   world. Yeamon was going on from here and I was going back; it was
   definitely the end of something, but I wasn't sure just what.

   I lit a cigarette and thought about other people, and wondered what they
   were doing tonight, while I was here on a dark street in Fajardo sipping
   rum out of a bottle with a man who would tomorrow morning be a fugitive
   murderer.

   Yeamon handed the bottle back to me and got out of the car. "Well, I'll
   see you, Paul -- God knows where."

   I leaned across the seat and stuck out my hand. "Probably New York," I
   said.

   "How long will you be here?" he asked.

   "Not long," I replied.

   He gave my hand a final shake. "Okay, Kemp," he said with a grin. "Thanks
   a lot -- you came through like a champ."

   "Hell," I said, starting the engine. "We're all champs when we're drunk."

   "Nobody's drunk," he said.

   "I am," I said. "Or else I'd have turned you in."

   "Balls," he replied.

   I shoved the car into gear. "Okay, Fritz, good luck."

   "Right," he said as I pulled away. "Good luck yourself."

   I had to go down to the corner to turn around, and as I came back up the
   street I passed him again, and waved. He was walking down toward the ferry
   and when I got to the corner I stopped and watched to see what he would
   do. It was the last time I saw him and I remember it very clearly. He
   walked out on the pier and stood near a wooden lamppost, looking out at
   the sea. The only living thing in a dead Caribbean town -- a tall figure
   in a rumpled Palm Beach suit, his only suit, now full of dirt and grass
   stains and bulgy pockets, standing alone on a pier at the end of the world
   and thinking his own thoughts. I waved again, although his back was to me,
   and gave two quick blasts on the horn as I sped out of town.

   Twenty-One

   On my way back to the apartment I stopped to get the early editions. I was
   stunned to see Yeamon on the front page of El Diario under a big headline
   that said "Matanza en Rio Piedras." It was from the shot of the three of
   us in the jail, taken when we got arrested and beaten. Well, I thought,
   this is it. The jig is up.

   I drove home and called Pan Am to book a seat on the morning plane. Then I
   packed my bags. I crammed everything -- clothes, books, a big scrapbook of
   my stuff from the News -- into two duffel bags. I laid them side by side,
   then I put my typewriter and my shaving kit on top of them. And that was
   it -- my worldly goods, the meager fruits of a ten-year odyssey that was
   beginning to look like a lost cause. On my way out I remembered to take a
   bottle of Rum Superior for Chenault.

   I still had three hours to kill and I needed to cash a check. They would
   do it at Al's, I knew, but maybe the cops would be waiting for me there. I
   decided to risk it and drive very carefully through Condado, across the
   causeway and into the sleeping Old City.

   Al's was empty, except for Sala sitting alone in the patio. When I walked
   to the table Sala looked up. "Kemp," he said, "I feel a hundred years
   old."

   "How old are you?" I said. "Thirty? Thirty-one?"

   "Thirty," he said quickly. "I was just thirty last month."

   "Hell," I replied. "Imagine how old I feel -- I'm almost thirty-two."

   He shook his head. "I never thought I'd live to see thirty. I don't know
   why, but for some reason I just didn't."

   I smiled. "I don't know if I did or not -- I never gave it much thought."

   "Well," he said. "I hope to God I never make forty -- I wouldn't know what
   to do with myself."

   "You might," I said. "We're over the hump, Robert. The ride gets pretty
   ugly from here on in."

   He leaned back and said nothing. It was almost dawn, but Nelson Otto was
   still lingering at his piano. The song was "Laura," and the sad notes
   floated out to the patio and hung in the trees like birds too tired to
   fly. It was a hot night, with almost no breeze, but I was feeling cold
   sweat in my hair. For lack of anything better to do, I studied a cigarette
   burn in the sleeve of my blue oxford-cloth shirt.

   Sala called for more drink and Sweep brought four rums, saying they were
   on the house. We thanked him and sat for another half hour, saying
   nothing. Down on the waterfront I could hear the slow clang of a ship's
   bell as it eased against the pier, and somewhere in the city a motorcycle
   roared through the narrow streets, sending its echo up the hill to Calle
   O'Leary. Voices rose and fell in the house next door and the raucous sound
   of a jukebox came from a bar down the street Sounds of a San Juan night,
   drifting across the city through layers of humid air; sounds of life and
   movement, people getting ready and people giving up, the sound of hope and
   the sound of hanging on, and behind them all, the quiet, deadly ticking of
   a thousand hungry clocks, the lonely sound of time passing in the long
   Caribbean night.

   About the Author

   Hunter S. Thompson was born and raised in Louisville, Kentucky. His books
   include Hell's Angels, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, Fear and Loathing
   on the Campaign Trail '72, The Curse of Lono, Songs of the Doomed, Better
   Than Sex, and The Proud Highway. He is a regular contributor to various
   national and international publications. He now lives in a fortified
   compound on an island near Puerto Rico.

   Scan Notes v4.0: Released in RTF only, with jpg map of San Juan area
   included. Because of the font used in the book, there were many missing
   periods. I think I caught them all, but you know how it is. In general,
   though, this was proofed carefully, with italics included.
